*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 54041 ***

                   The Philippine Islands, 1493-1898

   Explorations by early navigators, descriptions of the islands and
   their peoples, their history and records of the catholic missions,
    as related in contemporaneous books and manuscripts, showing the
   political, economic, commercial and religious conditions of those
   islands from their earliest relations with European nations to the
                    close of the nineteenth century,

                        Volume XLVII, 1728-1759



 Edited and annotated by Emma Helen Blair and James Alexander Robertson
  with historical introduction and additional notes by Edward Gaylord
                                Bourne.



                      The Arthur H. Clark Company
                            Cleveland, Ohio
                                 MCMVII








CONTENTS OF VOLUME XLVII


    Preface                                                         11

    Documents of 1728-1759

        The Santa Misericordia of Manila. Juan Bautista de
        Uriarte; Manila, 1728                                       23
        Survey of the Filipinas Islands. Fernando Valdés Tamón;
        Manila, 1739. (To this is added, "The ecclesiastical
        estate in the aforesaid Philipinas islands," by Pablo
        Francisco Rodriguez de Berdozido; [Manila], 1742.)          86
        The Order of St. John of God. Juan Maldonado de Puga;
        Granada, 1742                                              161
        Letter to the president of the India Council. Pedro
        Calderon y Enriquez; Manila, July 16, 1746                 230
        Letter of a Jesuit to his brother. Antonio Masvesi;
        Cavite, December 2, 1749                                   243
        Commerce of the Philipinas Islands. Nicolas Norton
        Nicols; Manila, [1759]                                     251

    Bibliographical Data                                           285
    Appendix: Relation of the Zambals. Domingo Perez, O.P.;
    Manila, 1680                                                   289








ILLUSTRATIONS


    Map of the Philippine Islands; photographic facsimile
    of original MS. map (ca. 1742) in Museo-Biblioteca de
    Ultramar, Madrid                                      Frontispiece
    Plan of Manila, ca. 1742; photographic facsimile from
    original manuscript in Museo-Biblioteca de Ultramar,
    Madrid                                                          89
    Plan of Cavite and its fortifications, (ca. 1742);
    photographic facsimile from original manuscript in
    Museo-Biblioteca de Ultramar, Madrid                           107
    Cebú and its fortifications, ca. 1742; photographic
    facsimile from original manuscript in Museo-Biblioteca
    de Ultramar, Madrid                                            115
    Plan of fort at Zamboanga, 1742; photographic facsimile
    from original manuscript in Museo-Biblioteca de
    Ultramar, Madrid                                               121
    Church of San Juan de Dios, Manila, in Religiosa
    hospitalidad, by Juan M. Maldonado de Puga (Granada,
    1742), facing p. 148; photographic facsimile from copy
    in collection of Eduardo Navarro, O.S.A., at Colegio
    de Filipinas, Valladolid                                       177








PREFACE


The documents presented in this volume (which covers the years 1728-59)
form a comprehensive and interesting survey of the islands and their
condition--social, religious, military, and commercial--during the
middle portion of the eighteenth century; and the writers of these
are prominent in their respective spheres of action. The appendix
furnishes a valuable description of the savage Zambals of western
Luzón, written by a Dominican missionary among that people in 1680.

The first document is a translation and condensation of the Manifiesta
y resumen historico de la fundacion de la venerable hermandad de la
Santa Misericordia (Manila, 1728), by Juan Baptista de Uriarte. This
poorly-constructed work is chiefly valuable, not for the direct
historical facts that it gives, but for the social and economic
deductions that can be made from those facts. For instance, in spite
of the great poverty prevailing among certain classes of Manila, it
is apparent that the city possessed much wealth, else it would have
been quite impossible for the brotherhood of Santa Misericordia to
carry on its beneficent work to so great an extent. The brotherhood
is founded April 16, 1594, after the model of the brotherhood of
the same name in Lisboa, its first establishment being in the school
of Santa Potenciana. The rules of the new organization are ordained
January 14, 1597, and first printed in 1606. The favor and protection
accorded it in the beginning by Luis Perez Dasmariñas is continued
by many succeeding governors and ecclesiastics, many of whom act as
purveyors. As might be expected, the first attempts toward charitable
aid are weak, but strength is gradually attained, and the noble work
of the brotherhood receives due recognition. Certain pious funds
are gradually established; the brotherhood executes many wills;
a hospital is early founded, under the spiritual charge of the
Franciscans. In 1597, the royal hospital is taken in charge by the
Misericordia at the request of Governor Tello, in order that it may
be managed better. Amid all the many disasters from the time of its
foundation to 1728--shipwrecks, other sea accidents, invasions by the
Dutch, earthquakes, etc.--the brotherhood ever lends a helping hand
cheerfully. The city is divided into three parts, for the greater
good of the poor and destitute. The various amounts of the alms
distributed, which are given throughout the work, show how well the
brotherhood discharged the purpose of its foundation. Christianity is
debtor to this organization through the aid furnished to the religious
orders at various times. Generous aid has been given to the prisons,
to poor widows, to orphan girls (for whom a school is founded), and
to noble destitute families, and others. Its activities extend even
to the ransoming of Spanish and Portuguese prisoners from the Dutch;
to the care of the native, Spanish, and foreign soldiers who fight
under the banners of Spain; and even to Japan. A productive rule of
the brotherhood is the one compelling all the brothers at death to
leave something to the association. From 1619 on, many loans are
made from the coffers of the Misericordia to the royal treasury,
which is generally in a state of exhaustion; and these loans are
always cheerfully given, even in the midst of the depressions that
the association experiences. That the brotherhood has enemies is shown
by citations from a manifesto which charges it with neglect and poor
business management. These charges are, however, disproved by our
author. Indeed, the Manila house exceeds in the amount of its alms,
those given by the Lisbon or mother house. Elections are annual,
and are made by ten members chosen by the brotherhood as a unit. The
board is composed of thirteen brothers, chief of whom is the purveyor;
his duties, as well as those of the secretary, treasurer, and three
stewards, are stated. The remaining brothers of the board are known as
deputies. Royal decrees of 1699 and 1708 exempt the association from
visitation by either ecclesiastical or civil officials, a concession
that had been long before conferred upon it by Tello. An important
event in the history of the brotherhood is the completion in 1634
of its church and school of Santa Isabel, whereby it does much good,
especially among the orphan girls under its charge. Confessions in the
school are in charge of the Jesuits. Many of the girls of the school
enter the religious life, but others marry, and to all such a generous
dowry is provided. Regular devotions are prescribed for the girls;
and for the brothers of the association various church duties are
ordained. The girls are also required to help in the kitchen and to
learn the duties of housekeeping, so that at marriage they are quite
ready to assume the position of wife. The number of girls and women
aided in this school and church reaches into the thousands, and the
expenses of the church have been considerably over 100,000 pesos. In
1656, the brotherhood makes a transfer of its hospital to the hospital
order of St. John of God. Chief among the funds established for the
use of the brotherhood are those by Governor Manuel de Leon of 50,000
pesos, and by the famous Archbishop Pardo of 13,000. Notwithstanding
the many disasters that have occurred in the islands, many of which
affect the brotherhood, the latter has never been in a better condition
than at the time when this manifesto is written. In his final chapter,
Uriarte gives a list of the members of the board of the brotherhood,
of which he is secretary. He also gives in full various documents
which he has mentioned in the body of his relation. Under charge
of the association is the appointment of twenty-nine chaplaincies
(apparently among the religious orders, for ten chaplaincies for lay
priests are also mentioned); and a certain number of fellowships are
supported in San José college. The brotherhood is composed of 250
members, whose qualifications and duties are given. The work ends
with an account of the annual alms given by the association.

The condition of the islands in 1739 is well depicted in the
relation furnished in that year to the home government by Governor
Valdés Tamón. Brief descriptions are given of the city of Manila,
and the port of Cavite, with their fortifications, gates, artillery,
garrisons, and military supplies; the document contains similar
accounts of all the other military posts in the Philippines, and
short descriptions of the various provinces in which the islands
are governed. Lack of space, however, obliges us to omit the greater
part of these accounts, presenting only those concerned with Manila,
Cavite, Cebú, and Zamboanga.

In 1742 an additional report was made for the king in regard to the
status of the ecclesiastical estate in the islands; this is here
given in full. The four cathedral churches are first mentioned,
with the jurisdiction, incumbent, expenses, and sources of income of
each. The other religious and the educational institutions of Manila,
and its hospitals, are enumerated, with statements of the aid given
to each by the royal treasury. A list is given of all the encomiendas
in the islands granted for such purposes, also of those granted to
private persons. Another section is devoted to the missions which are
carried on by the religious orders, and to the expenditures made for
them by the government of the islands, tabulated statements of which
are given, as in the other sections of this report. There is also
a table of the amounts collected by the religious who are in charge
of the mission villages as offerings on feast days. At the close are
found some remarks eulogistic of the friars' labors in the islands,
with an expression of regret that they have not carried out the king's
orders to have the Castilian language taught to the Filipino natives.

The work carried on by the Misericordia was well supplemented by that
of the hospital order of St. John of God, an account of which was
published (Granada, 1742) by one of its brethren in Manila, Juan Manuel
Maldonado de Puga. He describes the urgent need of aid for the sick
there, the efforts made in early years (chiefly by the Misericordia)
to supply this want, and the coming of the hospitalers of St. John
(1641) to Manila. The government places in their charge the royal
hospital at Cavite (1642), and the Misericordia surrender to them their
hospital in Manila (1656); and for a time they conduct a hospital for
convalescents at Bagumbaya. A full account is given of the transfer
of the Misericordia hospital, and of its history up to 1740. Some
difficulties arise between the hospitalers and the Misericordia, which
are decided in favor of the former by the Jesuit university. Maldonado
presents a careful description of the new church and convent erected
in 1727 by the hospitalers, and narrates the leading events in their
history. An interesting digression by our author describes the system
of weighing in use by the Sangley traders in the islands, and the
substitution therefor (1727) of the Castilian steelyard and standards
of weight; he states that he is the first to explain the Chinese
system, and we know of no other writer who has done so. He proceeds
to give an account of the manner in which the Filipinas province of
the hospital order is governed, with lists of its provincials and of
its present officers and members; and then enumerates the incomes and
contributions of the order in the islands, relating the history of
these, and similarly the grants of royal aid to its work there. In
this connection is described the personal service called reserva or
polo, which is imposed on the natives. Another chapter enumerates
and describes the charitable foundations [obras pias] from which the
hospital receives aid. Maldonado describes the present condition of
the other hospitals in the islands, those outside Manila being mainly
for special classes--the lepers, the Chinese, the soldiers, etc.; and
few of them are properly managed or served. He ends with an apology for
numerous errors in his text, due to the blunders of native amanuenses.

A letter from Manila (July 16, 1746) to the president of the India
Council recounts the difficulties and dangers with which the islands
are threatened by the Dutch and English, who are sending goods
from their Eastern factories to America, lying in wait to seize the
Spanish galleons, and even menacing Manila. The writer suggests that
the former trade between Luzón and the Malabar coast be resumed,
and that more effective measures be taken to overawe the Dutch and
English in Eastern waters.

The Jesuit Antonio Masvesi informs his brother (December 2, 1749)
of the failure of the Joló and Mindanao missions, and severely
criticises the governor, Bishop Arrechedera, for his infatuation with
the sultan of Joló, and his lavish entertainment of that treacherous
and crafty Moro, against the advice of the Jesuits. Masvesi sends
also an account of these matters by a brother Jesuit, these letters
being intended to counteract the influence of Arrechedera's reports
to the home government.

A curious memorial to the king, by an Englishman named Norton
but naturalized in Spain, urges that that country open up a direct
commerce with the Philippine Islands by way of the Cape of Good Hope,
and that mainly in cinnamon. He enumerates the products and exports
of the islands, and urges that these be cultivated more than they
are--above all, the cinnamon, which is now purchased by Spain and her
colonies from the Dutch, at exorbitant prices. The finest quality of
this spice could be produced in Mindanao, and Norton recommends that
plantations of cinnamon be made there, thus furnishing it to Spain
and the colonies at a lower price, and retaining their silver for
their own use instead of allowing their enemies to get possession
of it. He recapitulates the great advantages which will accrue to
Spain, to her people and colonists, and to the Indian natives, from
the execution of this project; and he would cultivate in the islands
not only cinnamon but pepper. He cites figures from the Amsterdam
Gazette to show how great quantities of commodities which might be
produced by the Philippines are brought to Europe from the Dutch
factories in the East; and he points out how Spain might profitably
exchange cinnamon and pepper for the lumber, cordage, etc., which
she now purchases for cash from Norway and Russia. He urges that
Spain should no longer submit to the tyranny of the Dutch and other
heretics, who are really in her power, since they must depend on her
for silver. He asks that the king will appoint a commission to examine
and report on his project, and enumerates various conditions which he
requires in order to establish the direct commerce between Spain and
Filipinas. At the end are stated the numerous advantages which would
accrue to Spain and the colonies from the execution of Norton's plan.

Appendix: Domingo Perez, one of the most noted of the seventeenth
century Dominican missionaries, writes an account in 1680, from
personal experience, of the newly-acquired Dominican province of
Zambales, in which he describes that province, and the people in
their manifold relations. He gives much interesting information,
for the truth of which he vouches, concerning the Malayan race of
the Zambals, whose peculiar characteristics he describes, from
the standpoints of their religion and superstitions, and their
social and economic life; describes the changes effected by the
softening influences of the Christian religion; and gives various
suggestions as to their management. They are seen to possess a
religion somewhat vague in its general concept, but quite specific
and complex in its individual points, with a graded priesthood, to
all of which, however, not too great importance must be attached. In
their superstitious beliefs, they approach quite closely to the other
peoples of the Philippines. Birds are a good or bad omen according to
circumstances; sneezing is always a bad omen; great credence is given
to dreams. Marriage is an important ceremony, and chastity is general
among the women, who exercise great power among the people. Feasts are
occasions for intoxication. Above all, they are fierce headhunters,
and strive to cut off as many heads as possible, although they are
a cowardly race. The Dominican policy of governing the Zambals is
one of concentration, in which they are well aided by the garrison
of Spanish soldiers stationed in the Zambal country.


The Editors

December, 1906.








DOCUMENTS OF 1728-1759


The Santa Misericordia of Manila. Juan Bautista de Uriarte; 1728.
Survey of the Filipinas Islands. Fernando Valdés Tamón; 1739. (To this
is added, "The ecclesiastical estate in the aforesaid Philipinas
islands," by Pablo Francisco Rodriguez de Berdozido; [Manila], 1742.)
The Order of St. John of God. Juan Maldonado de Puga; 1742.
Letter to the president of the India Council. Pedro Calderon y
Enriquez; July 16, 1746.
Letter of a Jesuit to his brother. Antonio Masvesi; December 2, 1749.
Commerce of the Philipinas Islands. Nicolas Norton Nicols; [1759].


    Sources: The first document is translated (partly in full and
    partly in synopsis) from Manifiesta ... del hospital de la Sancta
    Misericordia (Manila, 1728); from a copy in the possession of
    Edward E. Ayer, Chicago. The second, from an original MS. in the
    Museo-Biblioteca de Ultramar, Madrid; part of it (of minor
    importance) is necessarily omitted here. The third (largely in
    synopsis), from Religiosa hospitalidad por los hijos del ...
    S. Ivan de Dios en Philipinas (Granada, 1742); from a copy
    belonging to E. E. Ayer. The fourth, from an original MS. in the
    library of the Academia Española, Madrid. The fifth, from a
    transcript in the Ventura del Arco MSS. (Ayer library), iv, pp.
    297-305. The sixth, from an original MS. (or possibly a
    contemporaneous copy) in possession of E. E. Ayer.

    Translations: The first is made by James Alexander Robertson; the
    remainder, by Emma Helen Blair.








THE SANTA MISERICORDIA OF MANILA


CHAPTER I

Of the beginning of this venerable brotherhood of the city of Manila,
in the year 1594


[The Santa Misericordia of Manila [1] was founded in imitation of the
association of the same name which had been established in the city
of Lisbon in August 1498 with the consent of the vacant see and of
Queen Leonor, wife of Juan II. At the time of the foundation of the
Manila branch, Clement VIII occupied the papal chair, and Luis Perez
Dasmarifias was governor of Manila.]





CHAPTER II

Of the foundation of this venerable brotherhood, and the circumstances
attending it


The foundation of this venerable brotherhood was April 16, 1594,
the following being assembled and congregated in the church of the
holy Society of Jesus of this city: his Excellency, Don Luis Perez das
Mariñas, knight of the Order of Alcantara, governor and captain-general
of these islands for the king our sovereign; the very reverend father,
Fray Christoval de Salvatierra, of the Order of St. Dominic, governor
of the bishopric for his Excellency, Don Fray Domingo de Salazar,
its bishop, who at that time was in the kingdoms of Castilla; the
venerable dean, Don Diego Basquez de Mercado; the judiciary and
municipal body of this noble city; the master-of-camp of the royal
army of these islands, Don Diego Ronquillo; and the majority of the
nobility and citizens of the city. And they having been informed of
the so holy end for which this venerable brotherhood and confraternity
is instituted (in regard to which matter, a devout talk was given by
the very reverend father rector of the college of the said Society of
Jesus, Antonio Sedeño, who with the ardor of his spirit, informed them
of the importance that the foundation of the venerable brotherhood,
whose institution they were discussing for the spiritual and temporal
welfare of their neighbors, would be in the time of their greatest
calamities and miseries); in view of all of which, having conferred
with mature deliberation and due reflection concerning the seriousness
of the matter: they unanimously and harmoniously decided upon the
foundation of so holy a brotherhood. From that time it was considered
as established with the fixed resolution to begin the exercise of works
of charity, in accordance with the rules which were made for the better
government of the brotherhood, the original of which are conserved
in the first book of records. Then immediately their Excellencies,
the ecclesiastical and secular governors, who were present, each one
for himself, in the part that pertained to him, confirmed all the
abovesaid and affixed their signatures. It was agreed for the time
being that this venerable brotherhood of our Lady of Charity should
be established in the college of Santa Potenciana in this city.

The first brothers who composed the financial board [mesa]
of this brotherhood, numbered thirteen: the purveyor Don Luis
Perez das Mariñas, knight of the Order of Alcantara, governor and
captain-general of these islands; its secretary, Don Estevan de
Marquina; its treasurer, Don Juan de Esquerra; the deputies, Don
Juan Ronquillo, Don Christoval de Azqueta, Don Antonio de Cañedo,
Don Francisco de Poza, Don Diego del Castillo, Don Juan de Alzega,
Don Juan Arseo, Don Hernando Nuñez de Peñalosa, Don Juan de la Lara,
and Don Thomas de Machuca. Those gentlemen in the meeting held May 11,
1594, enacted that this venerable brotherhood should militate under
the protection and favor of that of Lisboa, since that is the head of
all the brotherhoods which are founded in the districts of España and
of India, so that recognizing this brotherhood as its offspring, they
might establish a mutual correspondence and a perpetual brotherhood,
and, as faithful brothers aiding one another, obtain the chief
end of their institute which is directed to the exercise of works
of charity and mercy. On this matter, having written to the said
venerable brotherhood, the latter responded without the least delay,
congratulating it on having obtained in its foundation and brothers
the limit of its desires, and despatched the rules of that house
which were received by this brotherhood in 1596. And in order that
they might be observed more fittingly and performed in accordance
with the condition and state of the land, it was necessary to revise
some of them, although only a few, but only after great thought
and consideration by very learned persons. Those which today are in
force were ordained January 14, 1597, in a meeting called for that
effect. They were given to the press in 1606. At the same time this
brotherhood succeeded in being admitted and recognized as an offspring
by the brotherhood of the Misericordia of the city of Lisboa.

It is not outside the present matter to mention at this place,
although briefly ... the governors and captains-general for the king
our sovereign, who have been brothers and purveyors of the house of
the Misericordia of this city, as well as the archbishops, ministers
of the royal Audiencia, the venerable deans, masters-of-camp, and
others, who will be named later, in the chronological order in which
they became brothers. It is as follows.

[These names are as follows: Luis Perez das Mariñas; Doctor Antonio
de Morga; Licentiate Christoval Telles de Almazan, auditor; Francisco
Tello; Fray Miguel de Venavides, archbishop; Luis de Bracamonte,
master-of-camp; Doctor Juan de Vibero, dean of the Manila cathedral;
Doctor Diego Basquez de Mercado, dean, vicar-general, and archbishop;
Miguel Garsetas, chanter and purveyor; Diego Ronquillo, master-of-camp
and purveyor; Juan Juares Gallinato, master-of-camp; Doctor Juan
Fernandez de Ledo, purveyor; Manuel de Madrid y Luna, auditor;
Doctor Alvaro de Mesa y Luna, auditor; Juan de Balderrama, auditor;
Alonzo de Campos, archdeacon; Alonso Faxardo, governor and purveyor;
Mathias Flores Delgado, auditor; Geronimo de Legazpi, auditor; Antonio
Alvarez de Castro, auditor; Sebastian Cavallero, royal fiscal; Doctor
Alonso Zapata, schoolmaster; Alvaro Garcia de Ocampo, auditor; Doctor
Francisco Samaniego, royal fiscal; Licentiate Juan de Volivar y Cruz,
royal fiscal; Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera, governor and purveyor;
Sabiniano Manrique de Lara, governor and purveyor; Lorenso de Olazo,
master-of-camp; Francisco Pasqual de Pano, auditor; Augustin de
Cepeda, master-of-camp and purveyor; Thomas de Endaya, master-of-camp
and purveyor; Francisco de Atienza y Vañes, master-of-camp; Doctor
Diego Camacho y Avila, archbishop; Doctor Francisco Rayo Doria,
dean, commissary of the Holy Crusade and purveyor; Doctor Domingo de
Valencia, bishop of Nueva Cazeres and purveyor; Conde de Lizarraga,
Martin de Ursua y Arismendi, governor and purveyor; Doctor Joseph de
Torralva, auditor, governor, and purveyor; Doctor Phelipe de Molina,
bishop of Nueva Cazeres; Doctor Manuel Antonio de Osio y Ocampo,
dean, vicar-general, and commissary; Doctor Juan de la Fuente Yepez,
schoolmaster; Marquez de Torre Campo, governor and purveyor.]





CHAPTER III

Of the condition and conveniences of this brotherhood in its beginning


Not a little admiration is caused upon beholding the weak foundations
upon which the providence of God erected so great a work for the
spiritual and temporal consolation of the poor and wretched people,
who suffered extreme necessities in this community. In the beginning
of its foundation, so scarce were the conveniences for obtaining
the desired fruit of its chief institution that scarcely did they
succeed in remedying the most urgent needs of their neighbors; but,
as it advanced on account of the liberal hand of God, it commenced,
as a father of charity, to scatter its gifts by means of worthy
benefactors of this house, the first who liberally ennobled and
enriched it being the said Don Luis Perez das Mariñas, with the
following concessions and alms.

1. The first concession which he conceded to this brotherhood was
three toneladas in the cargo of the ships which annually voyage to the
port of Acapulco in the kingdom of Nueva España, to bring the royal
situado belonging to these islands, the date of its bestowal being
April 30, 1594. It was confirmed by Don Francisco Tello, governor
and captain-general of these islands, January 24, 1597.

2. The second was of ten shops in the Alcayceria, the Parián of the
Sangleys, its date being August 29, 1595.

3. The third was of an encomienda of eight hundred tributes in the
valley of Ytuy, in whose conquest the said Don Luis was taking part,
its date being April 25, 1596.

4. The fourth was twenty-four young bulls which the said gentleman
applied from his Majesty's stockfarm as an alms for this venerable
brotherhood.

These concessions were the principal support of this venerable
brotherhood. After them followed some other alms, which in particular
demonstration of their especial purpose were made by the said gentleman
with the certain knowledge that by so good direction they would be
distributed without the slightest delay and proportionally to the
need of each person.

From that instant it appears that the providence of God pledged itself
in moving the hearts of men so that this so great work should take its
greatest increase by means of the plentiful bequests which were left
to this brotherhood, and funds which were frequently established as
an encouragement of the pious ends in which its charity was exercised,
committing their best alms and aids for the relief of the necessities
of the poor, both families and self-respecting persons, in the best
kind of bonds. The brotherhood obtained at the same time many trusts
which the faithful administration of wills gained for it, which were
in its charge, by the exact fulfilment which it gave to them. Therefrom
there resulted to this venerable brotherhood the well-known advantages
which immediately resulted to the benefit of the said poor, whose
needs and their relief were the only object of all its attention.





CHAPTER IV

Of the hospital which this brotherhood founded, and the Christian
and charitable exercises in which it was occupied.


This venerable brotherhood imagined that it was lukewarm and neglectful
in its love toward its neighbor, so long as it did not manifest it
in works proportionate to its greatness. On that account its charity
gave the first flights in the foundation and erection of a hospital
in which poor soldiers were to be treated. Inasmuch as there was no
other in whom to place the care of this so great need, this brotherhood
attended promptly to so fitting a relief, building it at the cost of
many pesos in 1596, supplying what was possible in so little time,
for the erection of said hospital. In fact, it was obtained with the
happiness which its memory should make famous three years after its
foundation. It gave its first attention to seeing that it was well
provided with beds, good food, and other things necessary for the
greatest relief of the sick, and secondly, by inquiring personally
and anxiously ascertaining the lodging of said sick soldiers, so
that they might immediately conduct them to the said hospital of
Santa Misericordia.

So Christian and punctual and careful in their material treatment
of the sick were they that this venerable brotherhood arranged for
three deputies of the financial board alternately and continuously to
live in the said hospital, for the better care and management of the
medicines, their prompt application, and the competent assistance
of physician and surgeon who treated the sick therein, as well as
the good administration and management which they were to have of
the many pesos which were spent for those pious ends; the seraphic
order of our father St. Francis [had charge] in the spiritual of the
care of their souls with exemplary zeal and love, by means of one
of its religious, a priest, who was maintained by this brotherhood,
and to whom it gave everything necessary.

Within three years after the foundation of this hospital, so much had
the idea of the charity with which the sick were treated, and the good
management which was observed in it, increased, that on December 3,
1597, his Excellency, Don Juan [i.e., Francisco] Tello, governor
and captain-general of these islands, sent to this financial board
(which was then at Santa Potenciana) Doctor Don Antonio de Morga, who
was an auditor of this royal Audiencia, and his lieutenant-governor
and captain-general, who afterwards merited promotion to the royal
Council of Castilla, to lay before the purveyor and deputies of the
brotherhood that it was quite apparent to all the members of this holy
confraternity that, in order that charity might be good it had to
commence by itself; and accordingly, since this financial board and
all its brothers were exercising the works of charity and mercy with
so great fervor as was well known, and since they knew the needs that
the hospital of the Spaniards, our brothers, was suffering, not so
much for lack of means as of management, wherefore, so great a number
of Spaniards died, and the wealth and means which his Majesty has given
it were not used to advantage: we should consider it fitting to include
that hospital with ours for the slaves, as was most suitable for us,
as it was of our own nation; and to manage it in the same manner as
ours of the Misericordia, so that the wealth and means which it had
should only be spent and laid out for the benefit of the sick, and
so that there might be order, concert, and relief, in order that by
this means the so many deaths that occurred daily therein, because of
the poor administration, order, and lack of relief, might be avoided;
and that if this financial board and the holy confraternity desired
to accept and to take charge of a matter of so great service to God,
our Sovereign, and of his Majesty, as taking under our charge the
management of the said hospital by way of charity, his Lordship, the
governor, would be prompt with all the power that he possessed and all
the means that he could use to withdraw this board from all individual
and general risk of giving account now or at any time of the wealth
and possessions of said hospital, which his Majesty had given it,
both as governor and as patron and manager. If necessary he would
transfer it and resign that office to this board, and would cause and
command that now and in no time should they be obliged to give account
of what his Majesty had given and assigned to the said hospital for
the support of the sick and the other expenses connected with it,
but that with it and all that it should have, we should proceed in
the same form and manner as with ours of Misericordia in accordance
with our rules. In regard to this, the governor would do all that was
necessary, and that his Lordship could do, for he was assured of the
great service that would be performed to God our Lord; also that the
conscience of his Majesty would be discharged; and that great gain
would come to the community and its citizens. Thus far the proposition.

On behalf of the board, reply was made that they would convoke
a general chapter of the brotherhood, in order to inform all the
brothers; and that they would hand in writing to the said doctor
whatever resulted in regard to this proposition, so that he might
inform the governor without any delay.

In the general chapter of the brotherhood, which was held December 6,
1597, it was resolved unanimously that the management of the said
hospital should be assumed by the board of the Santa Misericordia,
so that both Majesties might be served therein, provided that
the governor fulfilled the clauses and conditions which were set
forth in memorial on the part of the purveyor and deputies of
the brotherhood. On their presentation, the approval of them all
resulted. In accordance with and by virtue of an act and edict of the
superior government, transfer of the said hospital to the purveyor
and deputies of the Santa Misericordia became a reality, being given
before the alcalde-in-ordinary, Don Gaspar Osorio de Moya, and the
royal official judges, then Don Domingo Ortiz de Chagoya, accountant,
and Don Francisco de las Missas, factor. All the above was executed
January 3, 1598, and the board of the Santa Misericordia remained in
possession of the said hospital as will appear more at length from
the papers formed on this point.

This proposition in all its circumstances well shows the credit which
this venerable brotherhood had negotiated and gained, not only in the
estimation of the holy religious orders and the citizens of this city,
but also in the appreciation of the governor, Don Francisco Tello,
who transferred the royal hospital of the Spaniards with so great
satisfaction and confidence to the care and management of this board;
for his Lordship believed that by this measure, he was securing and
founding a new estate of relief, assistance, and aid for the sick
Spaniards of the said hospital, because of the kindness and good
management of so zealous and Christian brothers.





CHAPTER V

Of the disasters which assaulted Manila during the five years from
599 to 604; and how the charity of the brothers of Santa Misericordia
shone forth to the good of their neighbor.


[The years 1599 and the first four of the seventeenth  century
prove very disastrous for the Philippines, for they are visited by
many earthquakes, and suffer many other losses and misfortunes. The
first earthquake of June 21, 1599, does much damage to buildings,
and it is followed by other disastrous earthquakes in 1600. This year
also are lost the two ships "Santa Margarita," in the Ladrones, and
"San Geronimo," in Catanduanes; and the raid of Oliver van Noordt
occurs. In 1601, two galleons are lost in a hurricane--"Santo Thomas"
in Camarines on its way from Nueva España, and the second in the
shipyard of Pañamao near Leyte. Two ships from Acapulco land at the
islands in 1602 with goods wasted and rotten. In 1603, a fire causes
the loss of more than one million pesos in goods; and the disastrous
rising of the Chinese also occurs.]

This is a brief sketch of what happened during the five years in
this city of Manila--events which truly cannot be read without
great horror. During that time the extreme necessity of many poor
people was crying out for relief, especially that of many women,
who were coming from Nueva España, and wretched slaves who because
of the rigor of unsatisfied hunger were yielding up their lives. A
good proof of this truth is a letter (the original of which this
brotherhood preserves) from his Excellency, Don Diego Bazquez de
Mercado, most worthy archbishop of the holy cathedral church of
this city, who was promoted from bishop of Campeche to this church,
where he had before been its dean, and had been at the foundation
of this venerable brotherhood as the ecclesiastical governor of the
vacant see of Don Fray Domingo de Salazar. Its date is August 15, 613,
and it was written in duplicate to our most holy father, Paul Fifth,
and is of the following tenor.

[In this letter Vazquez de Mercado informs the pope of the growth
of Christianity in the Philippines, much of which he attributes,
in addition to the work of the religious orders, to the work of the
Santa Misericordia. He asks the pope to confirm the enclosed rules and
regulations of the brotherhood. He also asks for certain indulgences
in order that the rules may be followed properly.]

During this time of the most cruel miseries and disasters this
venerable brotherhood made a rare show of the greatest strength of
its burning charity, for it appears that, through this house of the
Misericordia, God erected a new storehouse, well provided with every
remedy for the consolation of invalids, the relief of prisoners, and
the remedy of the sick. Thus the Misericordia attended promptly to what
it considered most fitting, striving as much as possible to soften
the lamentations and tears of so many poor people who begged relief
in troops for their extreme need, by distributing among them daily,
and when the cords of hunger pressed them more tightly, in the public
places of this city vast alms, which exceeded three hundred pesos
weekly. At the same time it took the most vigorous measures for the
construction of new infirmaries or rooms, which were erected after
the hospital of the Misericordia, in order to attend nearer at hand,
and with greater and prompter assistance, the pains, treatment, and
relief of so many poor women who refused to receive them anywhere
else, as well as to the wretched slaves who were dying of hunger
or sickness in the out-of-the-way places of this city. If this so
Christian provision had been lacking those people could not have
obtained spiritual or temporal consolation.

With so powerful and Christian an example, this holy brotherhood
moved and attracted all the city, not only to the imitation of so
devout exercises but also succeeded in getting the free coöperation
of many alms which were distributed for so pious purposes. All of
the city was divided into three equal parts or wards, so that the
deputies of the board, who were successively occupied in this, might
distribute said alms, and many others which were given into their
own hands in proportion to the necessity and rank of each one of the
families. In this it was quite evident that the liberal hand of God
was working in order to succor with so great piety so innumerable
miseries. It appears that during the hard times of those five years,
this brotherhood distributed more than 80,000 pesos to the benefit
of all this community and its poor.

This brotherhood seeing that for the fulfilment of its principal
rule of relieving the necessities of its neighbor spiritually and
physically, the brothers who composed the board [mesa] were not
sufficient, thought it advisable to provide that, up to the number
of forty, they should busy themselves in attending promptly to the
greatest necessity that called to them, in order to furnish the most
efficacious relief; that it would be well to take charge of the poor
sick men and women, and bring them to the hospitals; that it would be
well to gather the dead bodies and bury them; that it would be well
for the assistance in hospitals and treatment of the sick, to watch
and find in all the suburbs and wards of this city, the persons who
needed physician, surgeon, and medicines. And upon the instant they
gave advice to the treasurer and almsgivers appointed by the board,
so that they might attend to the most important remedy.

One cannot imagine the work of this venerable brotherhood during the
time of those disasters in attending to and providing for all the
necessities in the two hospitals of the Spaniards and of the native
soldiers of the country; to the two infirmaries of poor women, and
of wretched slaves; and to the two prisons of the court and the city,
which were also dependent upon the assistance and relief which their
charity negotiated for them: since it is certain that besides the
personal work of the brothers, in those first years, for the above
purposes alone, and for other pious ends, there was spent from the
year 599 to that of 650 a sum of more than 540,446 pesos, 7 tomins,
which it has been possible to verify in the short time that I have had
for it, and other liquidations that will be set forth hereafter. But
this was done with such accounts and checks on the parts of treasurer
and almsgivers of this house that a strict monthly or annual residencia
was taken from them by the purveyor and other deputies, the balances
resulting either against or in favor punctually. Their revision was
entrusted to the purveyor and secretary of the board and immediately
they proceeded to the satisfaction of the said balances of all parties.





CHAPTER VI

Of the advantages and gains which resulted from the great alms which
were given out by the house of Santa Misericordia for the common
relief of spiritual and temporal needs.


[The brotherhood has had great influence in the increase
and conservation of the Catholic faith, both spiritually and
temporally. Many alms have been given to the religious orders that they
might pursue their work, especially between the years 1600-1650, such
alms being used for edifices of worship and other pious purposes. The
prisons have been a special object of care to the brotherhood, for the
prisoners of the two prisons in Manila have been looked after daily in
regard to clothing and other matters; and an attorney has been paid
to conduct their cases, in order that they might be concluded at the
earliest possible moment. For this more than one thousand pesos has
been spent annually. Alms have been given to widows to the amount of
four, eight, twelve, sixteen, twenty, and twenty-four reals weekly;
and the same is true of poor soldiers disabled in the royal service in
the Philippines and vicinity, to whom alms are distributed weekly. The
noble families who have been overtaken by adversity have also been
aided, and that so tactfully that the asking of alms by them has cost
no embarrassment. To them the weekly distribution has amounted to
twenty, thirty, fifty, one hundred and more pesos. The brotherhood
has always been careful to inquire into the morals of those among
whom its alms have been distributed, and evil morals have meant
suspension from the alms-list, to which they have been readmitted
on reforming. Brothers of the confraternity found to be leading an
evil life have been expelled from membership until they have given
assurances of reform. Especial care has been taken in relieving members
who have fallen into misfortunes. Orphan girls whose fathers have
died in the royal service in the wars have been sheltered, taught,
supported, and, at marriage, given a dowry. From the organization
of the brotherhood until 1634, more than three thousand orphan girls
have been so aided.]





CHAPTER VII

Of other works of charity in which this venerable brotherhood was
busied for the benefit of captive Spaniards and Portuguese, and
the alms which it sent to Japon and other districts, and the devout
exercises in which it busied itself with great profit.


[Silva's expedition against the Dutch who attempt to raid the islands
in 1609 and 1610, which ends in the defeat of the latter, April 24,
1610 (the leader of the Dutch being one Francisco Ubiter, who was with
Oliver van Noordt in his battle with the Spaniards), is a great drain
on the community. The loss of the ship "San Francisco" in Japan, which
left Nueva España in July, 1609, means a great loss to the citizens,
and gives the brotherhood much to do. Those wounded in Silva's wars,
up to the time of his death, April 19, 1616, both Spaniards and native
soldiers, as well as some foreign ones who participated therein,
become a special object of care to the brotherhood. Many Spanish and
Portuguese captives are redeemed from the Dutch during this period. The
charity of the brotherhood reaches even to Japan, where the Christians
are being persecuted so unrelentingly at this time. Lastly, the bones
of members of the brotherhood who have died and been buried in the
islands of Mariveles and Fortuna, and in Playa Honda and other places
are removed thence and buried in the Manila cathedral.]





CHAPTER VIII

In which are shown the alms that were distributed for masses among
the sacred religious orders, to the poor of the prisons, the widows,
and orphans, in dowries, food, and clothing of the daughters of the
brotherhood, etc., from the first years of its foundation until the
years of the great earthquakes of 645 and later until that of 60; in
which are included other sums which had been paid from the treasury
for the expenses of the building of the church and college of Santa
Isabel and other pious purposes.


At the time when this venerable brotherhood was founded with the
solemnity and attending circumstances that are mentioned in chapter ii,
for its better management and government, various chapters of rules
were formed. One of them was that all the brothers in the wills that
they signed were obliged to leave some alms to the brotherhood. With
such a beginning which gave prestige to the works of this house,
the brothers tried to have their wills ready before they started
for the undertakings or conquests that were undertaken during that
period. Hence resulted the foundations of various works, whose capitals
were invested in annuities with most secure bonds and from their rent
a great part of the alms which this house distributes, thus giving
fulfilment to their pious purposes. Besides this, they also ordered
in their wills other sums to be distributed at the discretion of the
board, and they were applied as a relief for the necessities of the
poor, for this brotherhood in the administration of the many works
under its charge has not pretended to extract other fruit than that
of serving God by relieving and succoring the miseries and hardships
of its neighbor, exercising itself continually in the fulfilment of
works of charity.

From the first years of foundation until that of 1650, it appears that
in the pious assignment of alms for the missions of Japon, in masses
which have been said by the sacred orders, in the church of the Santa
Misericordia, in alms for the religious communities, in repairs of
their convents, in relief for poor widows, in dowries for the girls
of the schools and other poor girls of the community, in their food
and clothing, and in other things, this venerable brotherhood has
distributed and spent 107,125 pesos, 4 tomins, 3 granos, which have
been earned and produced by the capitals of the funds invested at
interest. I surely believe that this house is one of the precious
stones which most beautify the crown of the king, our sovereign. But,
in every way, the paragraph which follows is of more value.

In these times and, those extending to the year 660, in which the
sums of pesos which entered into this house were very great, due to
the liberality of illustrious benefactors (among the least not being
those assigned by the governors of these islands, Don Luis Perez
das Mariñas, Don Francisco Tello, Don Juan de Silva, Don Sebastian
Hurtado de Corcuera, and Don Sabiniano Manrrique de Lara), the sum
of 356,363 pesos, 3 tomins, which the book of the treasurer for those
years gives as data, was reached. In that time there were many wills
which were fulfilled by this venerable brotherhood; and there were
not few bequests and alms which were given to it, especially by the
will of the alguacil-mayor, Don Bartholome Thenorio, who left special
memories in this house, the last being a principal of twenty thousand
pesos which still remain while the interest therefrom from the year
702 until the present time is more than twenty-five thousand.





CHAPTER IX

In which are shown in separate items the supplements of reals which
the house of Santa Misericordia has given to the royal treasury of
this city, during the periods of its greatest poverty and necessity,
occasioned both by the raids which have been made in these islands
by the Dutch enemy and for reënforcements and fortifications of this
royal camp and of other presidios of the royal crown from the year
619 until that of 726 for the service of his Majesty (whom may God
preserve for many years).


[The royal treasury reaches a state of exhaustion in 1619 because
of the inroads of the Dutch, who harry the Spanish presidios and
forts. In this year Governor Alonso Faxardo is compelled to ask a
loan of the brotherhood, for which he offers good security. That loan
is unanimously voted by the purveyor and deputies, on April 4, 1619,
and amounts to 39,599 pesos, 5 tomins.]

October 6, 638, it also appears from a certification of the royal
officials that they gave to the royal treasury by way of loan 104,609
pesos, 2 tomins, 1 grano, while Don Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera was
governor and captain-general of these islands, as a relief for the
necessity therein, and the prosecution of the conquest of Jolo and
the supplies of war which would be required for its total conclusion.

It also appears by another certificate that on July 3, 643, the
purveyor and deputies of the Misericordia paid 57,468 pesos, 2 tomins
by way of a loan, by virtue of an order of the said governor, to attend
to the necessities of the treasury. And inasmuch as in the said year,
because of his Lordship having before received a royal decree under
date of June 28 of the year 635, he wrote to this board a letter
[January 28, 1643] [2] which is conserved in the original with many
others of all appreciation, we believe it advisable to give it here,
its tenor being as follows:

[In this letter Corcuera cites the royal decree above mentioned which
orders general prayers said in all the churches of the islands for the
success of Spanish arms. The governor has written to all the bishops
and to the provincials of the religious orders asking the command to
be observed in their churches. He asks the Misericordia to have a mass
said in its church every Friday for the perpetual memory of the passion
of our Lord Jesus Christ, so that the Spanish pretensions may prevail.]

It also appears that in the year 643, forty-five thousand pesos
which came as part of the register from Nueva España, belonging to
the property of the said Don Bartholome Thenorio, were embargoed
in the royal treasury at the petition of Doña Ana de Zarate, his
sister-in-law, and although the members of the royal Audiencia declared
the said sum as free and its delivery due to the board of the Santa
Misericordia, as it was his executor, yet by certain results which
the fiscal of his Majesty made, it remained in the said royal treasury
until its liquidation, and lastly, by way of loan until the year 705,
in which the final balance of the said sum was paid from the royal
treasury, in order to fulfil the will of the said deceased.

It likewise appears by the reports and certifications of the royal
officials, that from the year 643 and upward, there were paid into
the royal treasury by order of Governors Don Sebastian Hurtado
de Corcuera and Don Diego Faxardo, 76,231 pesos 4 tomins, from
the board of Santa Misericordia by way of loan. And although his
Majesty (whom may God preserve) was pleased to order (by virtue of
the representations given by the board) through his royal decree of
March 8, 660, his Excellency, the viceroy of Nueva España, to pay the
said sum given to the royal treasury in six payments of 12,305 pesos,
2 tomins, it was impossible to collect the said sum in these islands;
for although the remissions of the said payments were made by his said
Excellency as an item in the register for the satisfaction which was
to be given to the board of Santa Misericordia, they were retained in
the royal treasury of this city from the year 663 until that of 666
in order to succor the necessity of the city, during a period of so
many disasters. Consequently, this new loan amounted to 61,526 pesos,
2 tomins, and both together amounted to 137,757 pesos, 6 tomins,
which were employed in matters of the royal service and the benefit
of these islands.

It also appears by another certification, that in the year 650, 13,740
pesos were embargoed in the royal treasury which had come consigned as
a part of the register to the board of Santa Misericordia, belonging
to the property of the alguacil-mayor, Don Bartholome Thenorio, by
virtue of an order from Don Diego Faxardo, on an occasion when the
royal treasury was suffering so great necessity.

It also appears from another certification, and royal provision
despatched by the said governor, which was announced for this board
March 1, 653, in which his Lordship represents the great need of the
treasury of his Majesty with the lack of reënforcements from Nueva
España; that although exact efforts had been made, on account of the
general poverty which all the citizens of this city, as was well known,
were suffering, it had been impossible to remedy, not even to the
extent that was necessary, so that it might endure so serious a lack;
and that because it was very fitting for the service of his Majesty
to seek all the possible means which might exist, so that the said
royal treasury should have money with which to succor the infantry
of this royal army, until our sovereign should deign to bring the
royal situado of these islands; for the present he ordained etc.: in
consequence of which the board of the Misericordia paid 70,601 pesos,
4 tomins to the said royal treasury, with which sum it remedied for
the time being its present necessity.

Lastly, it is well known that in the year 726, his Excellency,
Don Thoribio Joseph Miguel de Cosio y Campa, knight of the Order
of Calatrava, and governor and captain-general of these islands,
and president of the royal Chancilleria of them, finding himself in
great necessity of means to succor the need of the royal treasury on
the occasion of the loss of the galleon "Santo Christo de Burgos,"
with the profits of this trade, on the coast of the island of
Ticao, on account of a storm which forced it to beach on the night
of July 23 of the said year; and upon his Lordship, the Marquis,
seeing himself forced to take most prompt measures for the cutting
of timber for the new ship which was built in the royal shipyard of
the port of Cavite, for the supplies of the royal army of this camp,
and for many other inexcusable expenses, notwithstanding that the
commerce of these islands was weak and its citizens in a time of the
greatest necessity,--because of various supplies and gifts made to
his Majesty in order to succor the need of the said royal treasury:
nevertheless, the said marquis was obliged to solicit by other means
the things necessary for the fulfilment of the royal service, and
universal welfare of these islands, by having recourse to the house
of Santa Misericordia in order to obtain forty thousand pesos, which
were supplied without prejudice to the regular works of the house,
and were made from some deposits which could be detained in their
treasury until the arrival of the royal situado which was expected
from Nueva España. He offered to pay them promptly under the royal
word; by virtue of which, and the Christian efforts which preceded
from one and the other parties, the said board supplied 33,641 pesos,
7 tomins, to the royal treasury, so that it might in part be freed from
its greatest necessity. As soon as the royal situado of his Majesty
had safely arrived at these islands his Lordship, the marquis, kept
the word which he had promised by giving entire satisfaction to the
board of the Santa Misericordia, in the full delivery of the said sum.

As a conclusion of all the loans made to his Majesty by the house
of Santa Misericordia will serve that which it made in the year
646 to the royal treasury of these islands, when its governor and
captain-general was Don Diego Faxardo, on the occasion when they were
rumored to be surrounded by necessities and when the Dutch enemy was
at the entrances of Marivelez, as he showed in a letter which he wrote
the said board on September 12, 646, which is of the following tenor.

[In this letter Diego Faxardo thanks the brotherhood for the loan of
ten thousand odd pesos which it made to the royal treasury on this
occasion. All the loans between the years 1619-1726 have amounted to
2,449,418 pesos, 2 tomins, 1 grano. In addition, the Santa Misericordia
has paid into the royal treasury between 1629-1695, as executor for
deceased persons, 14,777 pesos, 2 tomins, 3 granos.]





CHAPTER X

In which is given public satisfaction in behalf of this brotherhood
for a chapter of a manifesto which has been published denouncing
the rectitude and faithful administration of the brothers; and it is
proved that the annuities of the house of the Misericordia not only
are not lost, as is supposed, but that, on the contrary, they are in
much better condition than at any other time.


[A manifesto published against the brotherhood charges lack of
business ability and neglect in the handling of its funds, so that
much of the money entrusted to it has been lost; and proposes that
the brotherhood be made subject to inspection by the authorities--by
the ecclesiastical ordinary, if the association be considered a pious
body, or by the ordinary with a royal minister, if the association
be regarded as under royal protection. Discussing the manifesto our
author shows that the affairs of the brotherhood have never been more
prosperous. As compared with the religious orders, their capitals
and the returns therefrom show better results, and not nearly so
many arrears. The brothers are good managers and look after their
business carefully. Those who have been benefited by the brotherhood
are so numerous that there are but few in the community who have not
been helped. From the year 1677 when the first fund was established,
the brotherhood has distributed 657,383 pesos, 6 tomins, 6 granos. The
purposes for which this sum has been applied are for masses for souls
in purgatory, alms for the religious orders and royal colleges, dowries
to poor girls, alms to widows, prisoners, and confraternities and their
processions, aid to the sick, and for divine worship, the support and
clothing of its collegiate daughters, support for women in retreat,
and aid for the buildings of their house and chaplaincies, etc. The
complaints against the brotherhood have emanated from those who have
not obtained all the aid that they desired because their credit is not
sufficiently good. If the brotherhood attempt to please everyone they
will end by pleasing no one. No partiality is shown, but affairs are
managed in a businesslike manner. Even were the brotherhood subject
to inspection, it could act with no greater rectitude.]





CHAPTER XI

In which a relation is given of the government and order observed
by the house of the Santa Misericordia in the administration of the
funds under its charge, and the dependencies annexed to them. The
alms which it gives regularly from one year to another, when there
are no shipwrecks, and the account which is given annually in it.


I do not believe that any of the many houses of the Misericordia
throughout Christendom, can be declared to be governed with better
rules or have better accounts than that of this city of Manila. I am
not speaking without sufficient foundation, since I have read with
special attention the great order which rules in the house of the
capital of Lisboa. That house is the mother and pattern and source
of them all, to whose teaching this faithful daughter of hers, not
only has not kept its great talents which I expect from her zealous
care, idle, but also has been able ingeniously to exceed her in the
pious indulgences of increasing and treasuring up more copious annual
reënforcements for the relief of the needs of her neighbor.

1 am very certain that this truth would run no danger amid the
extensive shoals of self-love, for it navigates governed by the
demonstrable reality which removes all kind of doubt; it is current
knowledge that the alms which are annually distributed by the royal
house of Santa Misericordia of Lisboa amount to forty thousand pesos
more or less; but it is not less well-known and certain that those
distributed by this house of Manila, when no shipwreck happens, or
other misfortunes, amount on the average to seventy thousand pesos
annually, making one mass of the benefit which the funds of the sea
yield, in addition to those which are produced by those which are
founded in bonds, possessions, monopoly, encomienda of his Majesty,
chaplaincies of which he is patron, and other sources of wealth which
are added to the huge mass of the said sum. This truth is so well
known to all this city that it need no further support than the same
certainty in which it is founded.

The order with which this house of Santa Misericordia is governed
is that on November 21, the day of the presentation of our Lady,
the Virgin Mary, and the day on which the brothers who have formed
the board for that year, and which begins the election of other new
members, the election is made by ten electors, whom all the brotherhood
appoint, in the manner provided by our rules. They number in all
thirteen brothers, the first being the new purveyor. [Next are the]
secretary and the treasurer, the latter being the one who was secretary
the previous year, who remains in that office in order to give account
of the dependencies and affairs of the house since he has handled them
all most intimately. After the above are the majordomo of the chapel,
the general manager of the house, and all annexed to it; majordomo
of prisoners; steward of the dish in which the alms are collected;
while the rest of the brothers are occupied in other important duties
of the house, such as visits of the treasury and of the prisons, the
distributions of alms, secret investigations which are committed to
them by the board, and others of like tenor.

So great is the authority and power of the purveyor of the house over
all the brothers of the Santa Misericordia, and so prompt the obedience
of the brothers, that it rather seems a well-ordered community of
religious than of seculars, for the first thing which they swear
on the holy gospels when they join the brotherhood is to well and
faithfully observe the rules of the brotherhood, and that whenever
they are summoned by the purveyor and councilors of the board, and
should hear the signal of the bells, they will go thither promptly,
if there is no legitimate hindrance that they can see. The purveyor
may, when in the board, command, agree, vote, talk, and keep silence,
whenever he pleases. He can command a board meeting called, and a
general meeting of the brotherhood at the advice of the deputies,
appointing the day which he considers best. He may transfer the board
and apportion among the brothers of it the duties of collector of alms,
and visitors of the prisons. He may remove the chaplains if they
commit any notable error in his presence, as well as the servants
of the board, and the rectress or portress of the college when he
thinks best. He may proceed to the correction and fitting punishment
of the collegiates by means of the rectress when they deserve it,
and he may (which is more than all the rest) remove with the advice
of the councilors of the board those brothers who are disobedient and
break the rules of the brotherhood. He may remove those who violate
their privileges and those who live after a scandalous manner, if
having been warned three times they do not turn over a new leaf. He
may appoint others in their place, so that they may serve God our
Lord in this His house. Finally, he may (although I do not) do many
other things which limit of space does not permit me to write here.

The seven deputies who are named above with determined duties shall
receive from their predecessors the books of which each one of them
has had charge, in order to enter therein the new accounts of debit and
credit of all that which shall be given into their power in the course
of the year, and all that shall be disbursed in order to fulfil the
pious ends which are entrusted to them. This having been inferred,
I say that the first thing which is asked by the new board from
the new purveyors is to take charge of the girls' school, which is
managed according to past custom with allowances and expenses which
are occasioned with it in the food and clothing of all the girls,
the salaries of the rectress and portress, and other servants who
are employed in it. And having accepted this duty, he goes ahead to
arrange the provisions of rice, oil, and sugar, and other substances
increased in times of the greatest cheapness and advantage; for whose
constancy in the new account which is opened in the book of expenses of
the purveyors, he sets down monthly the expense which is made in each
one of them, and in this way he proceeds in all those of the year,
placing each item down separately and procuring that the expenses
shall not be increased unless there be a greater number of girls
or wards, and, at the end of the year, he presents the book with
his account. Its examination and review is entrusted to the present
secretary, who balances it, either in favor or against, and having
set forth the balanced part, the said secretary places his approval
at the bottom of it and signs it, and enters it in the minutes of
that day so that it may stand forth for all time.

The secretary of the board on whom devolves the greater part of the
work has his new record book in which are entered all the despatches of
the petitions which are presented, the distributions which are made,
and the applications of the alms, both of dowry for the schoolgirls,
and the orphan girls outside [the school], the salaries which are
paid to the chaplains of the house, the portress and the servants of
the house, and the alms of the masses of Alva, 9 and 11, which are
said in our church on all feast-days. Especially with great care does
he enter the two inspections or general balances, which are struck
at the beginning and end of each board, of all the sums of pesos,
both of current funds, of dowries and alms, and of deposits which
are contained in the treasury under separate headings, in order to
apply them to the purposes which their founders assigned by full
directions. He affixes his rubric to the memoranda which are in the
sacks, with the statement of what each one contains, with the day,
month, and year of the record in which they are set down. The writing
of all the above with his own hand is an operation so indispensable to
his obligation that he is obliged to do it under oath. In case of his
absence, the same is done by the treasurer who supplies his absences
by writing in a separate book whatever occurs in regard to the business
matters of the house. And as soon as the secretary takes charge of the
current despatch of the house, he is obliged to transfer to his book
whatever shall have been decreed during his absence, so that by such
a proceeding all that which belongs to the record of that year may be
found in one volume. He is also obliged to enter all the sums of pesos
which are received in the treasury in the books prepared for them,
both of the dues collected and the usufruct which are yielded by the
sea funds, besides the great number of very troublesome collections,
although the love of God makes them mild and easy, to whomever works
for the welfare of his neighbor and the preservation of this house.

He is also obliged to adjust the appointments of the chaplains of
the many chaplaincies of which the board of the Santa Misericordia is
patron, by virtue of which, and of those presented as said chaplains,
a collation of the chaplaincies has always been given to them so
far as it concerns them, and the fitting support has been decreed
and given as a relief for their poverty. In this there is no other
consideration, either in this court or in other superior courts,
but it is passed upon before the said secretary just as in the house
of Lisboa, which has as a special privilege that the secretaries of
the said house may give attestations in all and any court.

The treasurer, who has charge of the possessions of the Parián of
the Sangleys, attends to the collection of their rents, and the
distribution of the alms, which are distributed every Saturday
throughout the year to the self-respecting poor at the door of the
house of the Santa Misericordia; and also the alms in pesos for the
masses which are said throughout all the months of the year by one of
the chaplains of the house for the soul of the founder, who endowed
it with the said possessions. And in the book which is delivered to
him with the enumeration and individual account of the places and
location of said possessions and of the purposes for so charitable
a foundation, the said treasurer enters the debit and credit account
of all the sums which are received monthly and are disbursed by them,
collecting receipts of them all for the account which must be given
at the end of the year, which passes in review and must be balanced
like the other accounts.

The treasurer is also the one who is present at the time of the two
inspections or general balances of the treasurer. If between the last
of the board which has just ended and the new one which is formed for
its government there is any difference because of some quantity of
pesos having been drawn in the interim, for any purpose for which it
has fallen due, he gives prompt account thereof by the vouchers made
and that appear from the preceding record book and by his receipts. In
this way he continues until the conclusion of the said general review,
which is generally the first thing. Following, other important points
are begun by the new board without any confusion arising.

The chapel steward receives in inventory all that belongs to the church
and its sacristy, with the aid of the chaplain-in-chief of the house,
from the acting secretary of the board, and the past steward. In his
presence, the list is formed item by item in the book of inventories,
and is received by the acting steward, and when it is completed to the
satisfaction of all, the four sign it, and it is placed in the first
record so that it may stand forever. He has also another separate
book of the new expenses, which are made in the church, sacristy,
and other things in his charge in the course of the year. In it he
forms the debit and credit account in minute detail, and at the end
of the year he presents the book; proceeding to his resolution with
the same solemnity as the others whom we have mentioned.

The attorney-general who attends to all the business and interests
of the house (except those of the annuities which have a separate
attorney with a paid advocate) receives in the book of suits all
those which the preceding board left pending, and also the writs
and other papers which are to be in his charge for that year. For
the better direction, management, and outcome of said suits, an
intelligent advocate is appointed for him to whom he may apply in
all his doubts. And in all that which he does in pursuance of this
order, he gives account in all the board meetings which are regularly
held semi-weekly. A secretary, who keeps the keys of the archives,
is obliged to give him all the documents that he asks for, and shall
keep a record of the withdrawal of such.

He also has another book, in which he enters in alphabetical order
the accounts of the funds, the costs belonging to each one, which are
caused in prosecution of the said suits, the signature of writs and
the cancellations [chancelaciones] of them. Later he forms from them
the general debit and credit account in which he places the salaries
of advocate, procurator, and attorney in the royal Audiencia with the
other expenses which belong to the said matters. At the end of the
year, he presents it, and with it the fitting obligation of review,
balances, and approval is made, as in all those above mentioned. But
independently of this, he shows the book of current suits, writs,
and other papers. Having been compared by the secretary, with the
statement of those which were given to him at the beginning of the
year, and of those which were given to him from the archives in his
term, if the whole thing agrees, he is absolved from his charge,
but in no other manner until the total fulfilment.

The steward of prisoners has in charge the collections of the
possession of the sites of the paddy-fields, whose usufruct
is distributed half and half in the two prisons of the court,
and of the city, for the support of the poor prisoners, and the
other half in the hospital of the Misericordia, which is in charge
of the religious of St. John of God, as a relief for sick men and
women. Besides this relief, which is monthly, they share other large
alms which are furnished from other funds administered by the house
of the Misericordia. In his book of the said possessions, with the
statement of their purposes, he forms his account of debit and credit,
and, at the time of its presentation, gives his discharge by the
receipts which he collects from the wardens of said prisons. That is
generally, or always, executed with the knowledge of the minister
who has charge of the inspection of the prisons and the relief of
the needs experienced therein.

The steward of the dish in which the alms are collected is obliged to
send it every fortnight to two brothers of this venerable brotherhood,
so that on Sunday they may go out to collect alms in all the public
parts of this city. They having observed this measure, return the
dish and the alms to the said steward. The latter, observing the same
rule throughout the months of the year, draws up his debit and credit
account. The alms which he declares before the board are equal in
sum to those which have been collected, according as it appears. In
that conformity it is approved, the same measures as before with the
others having preceded.

This is the government, order, and method which the house of the Santa
Misericordia has maintained faithfully, with the punctual assistance
and encouragement of the zealous, disinterested Christians. They are
the work of its brothers, whose powerful example in the faithful
administration of the funds entrusted to them has enabled them to
obtain exemption from inspection of their house until the present
time. They are today more assured than ever by dint of royal decrees,
the first dated Madrid, September 7, 1699; in which his Majesty
resolves and declares that this brotherhood, in order that it may be
maintained and continue its exercises with more encouragement, shall
not be subject to visits by the ordinaries, archbishops, provisors
in vacant see, or by any other ecclesiastical minister; and that it
shall be allowed to make use as hitherto of its good government and
to observe its rules and ordinances. And in the same vein is another
decree given in Buen Retiro, under date of June 11, 1708, in which
his Majesty also resolves that the decree above inserted be kept,
fulfilled, and executed, exactly according to the terms expressed
therein, and that no embarrassment or obstacle be opposed or permitted
to be opposed to the fulfilment of its contents, as such is his royal
will. In that one can see clearly how, having been well informed, his
Majesty approves the good government of this house and the practice of
its rules and ordinances. This is the greatest intent of this chapter,
and we leave the rest so that the parties may discuss it in or out
of court.





CHAPTER XII

In which are recounted the new hardships which came upon these islands
between the years 620 and 634, both because of the invasions of the
Dutch enemy therein and because of the putting back and loss of ships,
which happened in this period; and the devout exercises and alms of
the house of Santa Misericordia.


[In this period four ships put back and two are almost completely
lost. The Dutch, however, prove the worst thorn from which the
islands suffer, for they invade all parts of the Spanish colonies of
the Orient. The brotherhood, during this time, works with unexampled
energy in its measures for the public relief, and its work among the
hospitals. In this time, too, it builds the school of Santa Isabel
from certain bequests, spending in these and other things, 176,910
pesos, 6 tomins, 10 granos. In 1632, a new branch of the Misericordia
is formed in Formosa, which is taken under the protection of the one
in Manila. The latter sends the new branch 5,065 pesos, 5 tomins, 9
granos, as an aid to it in its work. The brotherhood also treats for
the ransom of Domingo Vilancio, S.J., and Fray Juan de San Joseph,
a Recollect, who are captives in Joló, and for which five hundred
pesos are expended. Although the former dies, before his ransom, that
of the latter is effected. For two hundred pesos, one Pedro Delgado
is ransomed in Japan, the ransom money being sent by way of Macao.]





CHAPTER XIII

In which notice is given of the conclusion of the costly building
of the church and school of Santa Isabel, and the removal thither
of the girls whom this brotherhood had in that of Santa Potenciana,
and in other private houses where they lived in retirement and with
their devout exercises distributed through the hours of the day.


It was the year 634, in which the brotherhood of the Santa Misericordia
saw their desires fulfilled in the conclusion of the costly building
of the church and school of Santa Isabel, for the commodious housing
of the many daughters whom they were maintaining in the school of
Santa Potenciana and other private houses of shelter, at the expense
of many pesos which it expended for the pious ends of their clothing,
dowries, and other like things; when the removal of them all to the new
school was arranged with especial joy and gladness of all this city.

[The opening of the school is marked by great ceremonies, the chief
event being the procession which is participated in by the brotherhood
and the girls of the school under the leadership of the rectress,
Cathalina de Aguirre. At the new church various exercises are held.]

The girls of this school have always been orphan girls, for the most
part daughters of parents of rank and of many merits and services to
the king our sovereign, who in the first days lost their lives in the
service of his Majesty. They continually praise God with the general
example to this city begging his Majesty for the greater conservation
of the Spanish monarchy and that of these islands and their fields of
Christendom. They often frequent the holy sacraments, the holy Society
of Jesus having precedence in the task of confessing them. They spend
four hours in the choir by day and night, and are occupied in hearing
mass and reciting their devotions. They are employed by day in the work
of sewing and helping in the kitchen, for which purpose two of them are
chosen weekly, both so that the food may be cooked with neatness and so
that they may learn how to take care of and manage a house. They are
under the charge of a rectress, and the rectresses have always been
persons of great virtue and example. They have a portress who takes
care of the porter's lodge, as well as of the actions and decorum of
the said collegiate daughters when they call them below. On Fridays
during Lent they meditate and think over the devout exercises of the
Via crucis inside the school. At night they recite the rosary in a
chorus to the queen of the angels and at the stroke of half-past nine,
taps sound and silence reigns. They all sleep together in one single,
capacious, decent, and neat dormitory. They eat in the refectory and
have a lesson out of spiritual books. During Lent they listen in the
choir to the sermons which are preached in the church of said school
on Monday mornings, as well as to the explanation of the Christian
doctrine on Sunday afternoons. Those who have charge of so holy a
work are those of the holy Society of Jesus, at the request of this
board. Finally, since the chapters of the rules of the said school
are many and various, they are omitted for the present, inasmuch as
the limit of time does not allow anything else.

The brothers of this venerable brotherhood, besides the festivities
and functions which our ordinances provide, annually attend the said
church on the day of the glorious apostles St. Philip and St. James,
and the following: in the first to celebrate the feast with greater
solemnity for the health of their Majesties and the increase and
conservation of their kingdoms and domains; and in the second, to
celebrate the obsequies and honors for the deceased kings. For the
greater concurrence, authority, and luster of so royal a function, all
the sacred orders are invited and are punctually present. A catafalque
of the size demanded by such an act is erected and on it are placed
the royal insignias, and a great quantity of wax, and the vigil mass
and response are chanted, accompanied by the best music that can be
found, in order thereby to make a rare showing of loyalty and love by
this demonstration of piety and acknowledgment, which this venerable
brotherhood has always had, and has for its kings and sovereigns.





CHAPTER XIV

Of the number of girls whom this venerable brotherhood has supported
since its foundation until the present time; and the report of the
expenses caused by the said girls during all that time; also [the
expenses] in the church of Santa Isabel in their charge, and other
particulars.


[Those helped by the brotherhood are the hospital of St. John of God,
of which the board of the brotherhood is patron; the house of women
sheltered by the ecclesiastical judge of this archbishopric; the
religious orders; the public prisons; destitute widows; orphan girls;
and all poor beggars. But most of all the school of Santa Isabel is
eloquent in its praises, for since 1634, the brotherhood has helped
13,270 girls, scholars, wards, women, and other persons. Many girls
it has sent to swell the ranks of the Order of St. Clara, while many
have been married, for whom a dowry has always been provided. The sum
of 508,916 pesos, 4 tomins, 3 granos, has been spent in this work. From
its foundation until 1634, the brotherhood has helped many girls in the
school of Santa Potenciana, maintaining besides many girls in private
families. The number of such girls exceeds seven thousand, many of
whom have embraced the religious life, while others have married,
a dowry being furnished to these latter. They have never refused to
shelter abandoned children, for whom they have cared tenderly, teaching
them and sending them into the life for which they are fitted.]

The spiritual welfare must not be passed by in silence, which
has been and is being obtained for all this city, from the time
of the erection of the church called Santa Misericordia. There,
every Sunday, and day of observance, three masses are specially
said: the first between 4 and 5 o'clock in the morning, from which
follows the spiritual consolation which the poor share, who, by their
necessity and poverty, cannot succeed in hearing it if it is not held
at such an hour; the second, at nine o'clock in the morning, which
is attended by the majority of this city; and the third at eleven,
so that the poor slaves and servants of this city, after concluding
their domestic tasks, may attend it without failing in what pertains
to their obligation. Besides the above, there are many which are
daily celebrated in the said church, where on many occasions of the
year there is generally an open collectorship of masses, which are
said with the alms which the funds of this house produce.

The expenses of this church in all that pertains to divine worship
and other functions which are frequent, both of the interment of
brothers, of their wives, and firstborn, and honors which are shown
them, both in attendance on those executed, their burial, and other
charitable exercises in which this brotherhood is employed, exceed
118,438 pesos, 3 tomins, since the time of its foundation. It excels
in the adornment of its temple and in the neatness and glory of the
things of divine worship and in that of the priestly ornaments, and
other things. This is all in charge of a deputy of the board, who is
annually appointed as chapel steward, so that by the attention and
care which he gives, it may all be done in a fitting manner, without
there being any omission, and so that there may be no falling off of
observance in said church and its sacristy.

[In addition the brotherhood distributes 25 or 30 pesos weekly to
the Japanese beatas of San Miguel; and 3 pesos apiece to certain poor
collegiates called "Sons of the Board [mesa] of Santa Misericordia,"
who are attending San Juan de Letran. This latter sum is given to
the president of the college, who looks after their education.]





CHAPTER XV

In which are mentioned the various events in these islands by land and
sea during the years 635-645, and supplies given to the royal treasury,
and devout exercises of the brothers of the Santa Misericordia.


[In 1635, no ship sails for Nueva España "for reasons of state, or
decisions of Governor Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera." Although a ship
does reach Acapulco in 1637, the citizens of the Philippines are not
much benefited thereby, for the goods are all embargoed at Acapulco,
contrary to the usual custom, because of certain strict edicts,
and all appraised at four times their value, the consequent duties
being very heavy. During this period also occurs the disastrous loss
of the island of Formosa. The islands are offered some cheer by the
happy successes of Corcuera in his Joló campaign, which is begun
in 1637. Before going on this campaign, he writes the brotherhood,
under date of December 4, asking its prayers for the success of his
undertaking. At the end of the expedition, the brotherhood generously
gives the royal treasury a loan of 104,609 pesos, 2 tomins, 1 grano. A
letter from Corcuera October 26, 1639, to the brotherhood asks it
to take charge of the conversion of two of the Moro hostages who
have been brought from Joló; all the religious orders also having
been asked to do the same. The flagship "Concepcion" is lost in the
Ladrones in 1638 on its way to Acapulco; and in the following year,
the two ships from Nueva España, on the Cagayan coast. From the end
of 1639 to the beginning of 1640, the city passes through a hard
time with the great danger arising from the Chinese revolt. The poor
are troublesome for there are many of them, and the brotherhood is
compelled to labor diligently. To relieve the necessities of the
royal treasury, the sum of 102,468 pesos, 2 tomins is lent it, on
the occasion of the loss of the galleon, "Encarnacion" on the Mindoro
shoals while on its way to Ternate with reenforcements.]





CHAPTER XVI

Of the great earthquakes of the year 1645, and the events that happened
therein; losses of the house of the Misericordia in the works in its
charge, and the adjustment of the losses of its investments, which were
imposed on the houses demolished, in virtue of a general compromise.


[The first shock of the earthquake that occurs on November 30, 1645,
is followed by many other shocks more or less severe. By the general
appraisals made of the losses the Misericordia is declared in 1648
to have had 89,855 pesos invested in houses, of which only material
worth 23,177 pesos, 2 tomins, 6 granos is saved, the loss thus being
66,677 pesos, 5 tomins, 6 granos. The brotherhood further loses 2,739
pesos, 6 tomins, 2 granos, for the tearing down of ruined walls,
and spends 7,725 pesos, 2 tomins, 8 granos for the rebuilding of
the ruined houses, the total loss thus amounting to 77,142 pesos,
6 tomins, 4 granos. Thus the final assets of the brotherhood on the
old investment are 12,712 pesos, 1 tomin, 8 granos. However, the real
value of the investment of the association amounts to 159,365 pesos
more. A capital of 69,510 pesos which is invested in stockfarms and
farming lands of the religious orders is fortunately saved. Between
the years 1634-1660 the sum distributed by the Misericordia amounts to
220,770 pesos, 1 tomin; and between 1637-1651, 72,948 pesos, 7 tomins,
6 granos. After the earthquake the brotherhood rebuilds its church,
college, and the hospitals for the natives, poor women, and slaves of
the city. In addition, it gives 400 pesos toward the rebuilding of
the cathedral; 300 pesos for repairs on the Franciscan convent; 100
pesos for repairs on the chapel of San Antonio of the tertiary branch
of the said order located in the church of their convent; 150 pesos
to Fray Christoval del Castillo, definitor of the Franciscan order
(40 of them to be used for his support and that of the religious in
his charge in the hospital for the natives, and 110 pesos for pious
works and grave necessities, namely, aid in ransoming a Recollect
religious who has been captured by the Joloans); 200 pesos to the
father procurator of the Recollects; 200 pesos to Fray Juan de San
Antonio, provincial of the said order; and lastly many alms to all
the needy of the community.]





CHAPTER XVII

Of other new misfortunes which occurred in these islands from the year
646 to that of 673; loans given by the Board of Santa Misericordia
to the royal treasury, and the great alms which it gave during that
time; and the transfer of the hospital of the house to the religious
of St. John of God.


[In the years 1637 and 1659 memorials are sent to Spain of the
wretched condition of the islands, occasioned by frequent invasions,
insurrections, repeated loss of ships, and exorbitant royal duties
charged in Acapulco. The ships lost are the following: in 1646,
the galleon "San Luis," on the Cagayan coast, when coming from Nueva
España, and the galleon "Nuestra Señora de Buena Esperanza" on the
island of Negros, while returning from taking reenforcements to
Ternate; in 1648, the ship "Buen Jesus" is burned on its return from
Nueva España in Lampon, to prevent its falling into the hands of the
enemy, and the same year are lost the galleon "Nuestra Señora de Guia"
in the river of Camboja where it is being refitted, and the galleon
"San Antonio de Padua" in Mindoro with the reënforcements which it is
taking to Ternate; October 21, 1649, the flagship "Encarnacion" on the
coast of Bula, while returning from Nueva España; in 1651, the ship
"San Joseph" on the island of Luban, while coming from Camboja, and the
same year the galleon "San Diego" puts back, after leaving for Nueva
España; in 1653, the galleon "San Diego" in Limbones, while returning
from Nueva España; in 1655, the galleon "San Francisco Xavier," in the
bay of Boronga, while returning from Nueva España, with the loss of
many people, a new galleon which has been built in Camboja at great
expense, with the loss of many people; and two merchant ships with
goods belonging to the citizens of Manila; in 1656, two ships after
leaving for Nueva España, put back; in 1669, two ships put back, but
leave in 1670, one of them being burned at Acapulco; and in 1672,
the ship "San Thelmo" puts back. No reenforcements come from Nueva
España in the years 1647, 1652, 1662, and 1663. In 1662, the commerce
of Macao is lost because of the Portuguese revolt against Spain; and
at that time the Portuguese seize a ship with 30,000 pesos which was
intended for the purpose of war supplies for the Spanish monarchy,
and much property belonging to the citizens of Manila. In 1647, a
fleet of thirteen Dutch ships enters the bay of Manila, where they
demolish some of the fortifications, although they are finally driven
off, retiring to the northward where they inflict much damage. The
embassy of the Chinese pirate Cogsen under charge of Fray Victorio
Risio, O.P., throws the city into a flutter, and new fortifications
are pushed apace, a process which however, exhausts the treasury and
the citizens. Sabiniano Manrrique de Lara writes to the brotherhood,
under date of December 14, 1662, asking them to attend the octave
ordered to be held in the cathedral after Christmas. The presidios of
Ternate and Zamboanga are abandoned in view of the approaching trouble
with the Chinese pirate. An earthquake that occurs August 20, 1658,
proves more disastrous than that of 1645. Insurrections in several
provinces in 1660 and 1661 are put down only after great expense,
as is that of the Chinese in 1672. The brotherhood gives alms of more
than ten thousand pesos in 1646 for the equipment of the fleet that
is to oppose the Dutch; in 1650, a second loan of 13,740 pesos for
the expenses of the treasury; another loan of 7,601 pesos, 4 tomins
in 1653, to aid the expenses of the royal army; a fourth loan for the
equipment of fleets and presidios; a fifth of 61,526 pesos, 2 tomins:
a total of 169,099 pesos, 2 tomins. In addition to these loans,
the brotherhood distributes alms to many sources, between the years
1651-1690, the total sum of 172,467 pesos, 7 tomins, 6 granos. May 31,
1656, the purveyor and deputies grant a transfer of the hospital and
all its properties, etc., to the hospital Order of St. John of God, on
the condition that the purveyor and deputies as patrons, may inspect
the hospital once each year, and if they note any defect or neglect
report the same to the prior in order that it may be remedied--a
transfer made because of hard times. The brotherhood continues to
aid the hospital with many alms, notwithstanding its own poverty.]





CHAPTER XVIII

Of the appreciation and esteem which the governors and
captains-general, and the archbishops and bishops of this holy
cathedral have had for the house of Santa Misericordia; and other
particulars worthy of being read.


[Those governors, archbishops, and others who have signally aided
the brotherhood in alms and other ways are the following: Luis Perez
Dasmariñas, Francisco Tello, Archbishop Venavides, Archbishop Diego
Basquez de Mercado, Governor Alonso Faxardo, Bishop Fray Pedro de
Arce, Governor Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera, Governor Diego Faxardo,
Governor Sabiniano Manrrique de Lara. The latter writes a letter to
the brotherhood under date of March 17, 1660, excusing himself from
attending certain ceremonies because of stress of work, and makes
provision for the running of the school of Santa Isabel. Governor
Manuel de Leon y Saravia founds a fund of 50,000 pesos for the
benefit of the entire community in 1677, an action that is imitated
by Francisco Coloma, who leaves a principal of 4,000 pesos. Fray
Felipe Pardo establishes another pious fund in 1689 of 13,000 pesos,
and in a letter of March 21 of that year, asks the brotherhood to
accept the same. Fray Andres Gonzales, bishop of Nueva Caceres,
writes in an appreciative vein to the brotherhood, and also founds
a pious fund. April 18, 1691, the dean of the cathedral also writes
appreciatively to the Misericordia. The latter, on the occasion of
the destructive earthquake of 1645, offers the use of its church
to the cabildo of the cathedral as that edifice has been quite
destroyed. November 26, 1652, the offer is accepted and a commission
appointed by the dean to settle conditions with the brotherhood. These
conditions relate to church service and procedure, both the cabildo
and the Misericordia making certain concessions. The religious orders
of Manila have at various times made mention of the Misericordia and
its good work to his Majesty, and the same thing has been done by
governors and archbishops. To these good reports, which are sent to
his Majesty in 1693, are due the royal decrees of 1699 and 1708 by
which the brotherhood is declared exempt from visit by the ordinary,
archbishop, provisors during vacant see, or by any other ecclesiastical
minister; as well as the papal concessions that are made it. Our author
defends the exemption from visit against those who oppose it. Many
honors have been heaped upon the brotherhood during royal religious
ceremonies. Lastly, Governor Marquis de Torrecampo has shown honor
and appreciation to the association, on many occasions, even naming
a new ship which he had built "Santo Christo de la Misericordia,"
in honor of a crucifix owned by the brotherhood.]





CHAPTER XIX

Satisfaction given by the Board of the Santa Misericordia to all
this city, in answer to certain words of the opposing manifesto,
which charge it with omission; proving that it could not, or ought
not, immediately upon the death of Captain Manuel Lobo, fulfil the
terms of his will, or distribute his wealth in accordance with his
last wishes, until the time that it did do so by the direction of the
learned opinion of the professors of the royal university of this city.


[The faithful administration of wills has ever been one of the chief
glories of the brotherhood. The above-mentioned captain dies in the
Marianas, September 8, 1709, leaving the board as his executor, and
his mother as his heir. In this chapter the words of the manifesto
charging the brotherhood with neglect in not settling up the will
above mentioned in more than fifteen years, are cited; and then by
means of arguments, letters and the opinion of the professors of the
university, full answer is made to the charge, and the action of the
brotherhood justified.]





CHAPTER XX

Of the present condition of the house of Santa Misericordia, after so
many and so repented disasters; beginning of its new increases in the
foundation of various funds at this time; the new misfortunes which
succeeded from the year 700; and alms which the house gave during
this time.


[The years of bad luck experienced by the brotherhood in the loss
of money and the necessities of the times, when its expenses are
increased disproportionally by the repair of its church, college,
office, hospital, distribution of alms for rebuilding other edifices,
and the remedy of other public necessities, at last turn by the
foundation of certain pious funds. The first is founded by Manuel
de Leon y Saravia, in 1677, and is for 50,000 pesos. In imitation of
him ten more funds are established, which produce alms amounting to
170,956 pesos, 4 tomins up to the year 1700, which are distributed for
the spiritual and temporal needs of the poor, and for other purposes.]

At this time the possessions of Pedro Quintero Nuñes and those
of Licentiate Manuel Suares de Olivera, as well as the stockfarm
of the royal alférez Joseph Correa, fell to the house of Santa
Misericordia. They have been and are of great profit to the sick
poor, and imprisoned, to some of the sacred orders, for the blessed
souls of purgatory, and other pious purposes. It is a fact that up
to the present time, they have produced in benefit to all the above,
105,258 pesos, 4 tomins, almost half of which was spent up to the
year 700, which would be doubtless of great consolation and relief
to the poverty and necessities of this community in times when even
the citizens, ill-satisfied by the blows of the past disasters, were
experiencing new outbreaks and losses in their wealth, by those which
happened frequently to the galleons of this line, from their having to
put back to port, and the embargo of the goods, which were embarked
therein. For from the year 673 until that of 700, trade received
signal injuries in the port of Acapulco, the merchandise of the trade
being embargoed during the years 676 and 677, in revenge for having
detained in this city at the advice of royal officials 330,000 pesos,
which came in the year 675 from the citizens of Mexico in violation of
royal decrees. In another decree of 678, obtained by the said citizens
[of Mexico] by dint of very inaccurate reports, it was ordered that
those of this city return said sum, increased by interest at the rate
of twenty-five per cent. That shaving [escalfe] was made from the
embargoed goods. From so notorious setbacks, other losses of greater
consideration followed; and from the increase of excessive taxes which
were imposed on those interested who took the galleon "San Antonio de
Padua" to the port of Acapulco in the year 79, the citizens suffered
very great setbacks. In the year 682 the ship "Santa Rosa" put back,
and in 86, while attending to the preparation of the ship "Santo Niño"
for Acapulco, news came that there was a squadron of eleven hostile
ships among the islands. On that account the voyage was suspended
and the ships were prepared to go out to oppose the said squadron and
guard the galleon which was expected with the succor from Nueva España.

[Calamities are still in store for the Philippines. The "Santo
Niño" leaves Cavite in 1687, but is forced to put back in order
to winter at Bagatao, and returns to Cavite with its cargo half
rotten. Reenforcements providentially come from Nueva España in
1688. In 1690, the almiranta while returning from Nueva España is
lost in the Marianas, and although the people are saved, the cargo is
partly lost. The galleon "Santo Christo de Burgos" is compelled to
put back to Camarines to winter in 1692. Sailing once more in 1693,
it is never again heard of. The "San Joseph" is lost three days out
from port in the island of Luban, and many people are drowned. In 1696,
as there is no galleon to send to Nueva España, a patache is bought
for the trade, but the 74,000 pesos that it is compelled to pay in
Acapulco for duties, is so great a tax on the citizens of Manila that
but little is left for them. However, amid all these disasters, there
is one bright ray, namely in the pious funds that are established in
the brotherhood. From 1673-1700, these funds realized 227,724 pesos,
3 tomins, which are distributed among the poor and used for other
purposes. Between the years 1690-1701, the sum of 44,425 pesos,
3 tomins is realized from investments and applied to pious ends.]





CHAPTER XXI

Of the alms which the house of Santa Misericordia has distributed
from the year 701 to that of 728; losses suffered by the funds in
their charge during that time, and an account of other things.


[The brotherhood expends great sums between the years 1701-1728,
for the sick, prisoners, beggars, souls in purgatory, support of
orphan girls, and poor widows. The interest on annuities for that
period amounts to 78,115 pesos, 6 tomins; returns from commerce,
to 417,202 pesos, 5 tomins, 6 granos; while for the college is spent
the sum of 86,136 pesos, and for divine worship, besides the masses
said and some other things, 37,345 pesos, 4 tomins, 6 granos: a sum
total of 618,799 pesos, 7 tomins. During this period occurs the loss
of the ships "San Francisco Xavier" and "Santo Christo de Burgos,"
in which the brotherhood was a heavy loser.]





CHAPTER XXII

In which are contained the indulgences and favors conceded by the
supreme pontiffs to the brothers and sisters of Santa Misericordia of
the city of Manila, which are copied from the original briefs, relics,
with which it is enriched; with its authentic royal decree which
exempts and preserves it from visits by the ecclesiastical ordinaries,
in imitation of the royal house of Lizboa; the chaplaincies and becas
of which it is patron, the number of brothers of which this venerable
brotherhood is composed and those who serve this present year in the
Board of Santa Misericordia; and the report of the alms which are
given annually.


The purveyor and deputies who compose the illustrious Board of Santa
Misericordia at present are as follows: General Don Benito Carrasco
y Paniagua, purveyor (an office he has held three times previously);
secretary-in-chief for the king our sovereign of this noble city and
its deputation, with active voice and vote by privilege in its most
noble ayuntamiento; secretary of the board, Captain Don Juan Baptista
de Uriarte (author of this small work), regularly-appointed regidor
for his Majesty of said noble ayuntamiento, who as ex-treasurer
took charge of the office of secretary, in accordance with the
rules, in the absence of Sargento-mayor Don Joseph Antonio Nuño de
Villavicencio, general treasurer of the bulls of the Holy Crusade,
accountant regulator, regularly-appointed regidor of this noble city
and special notary of the Holy Office, as he has been promoted to the
post of accountant, a royal official of the royal treasury; treasurer,
General Don Miguel de Allanegui, accountant of accounts and results of
the royal treasury of these islands, and familiar of the Holy Office;
chapel-steward, General Don Joseph Verelo de Urbina; purse-steward and
attorney-general, Captain Don Antonio de Olivarria; prison-steward,
Sargento-mayor Don Joseph de Vega y Vic; steward of the plate, who
looks after the gathering of alms, Captain Don Simon de Amechezurra;
and deputies of the board, General Don Antonio Sanchez Zerdan, and the
sargentos-mayor, Don Joseph Beltran de Salazar, regularly-appointed
regidor for his Majesty of this noble city, Don Frutos Delgado, Don
Antonio Lopez Perea, also senior regidor of the city, and Captains
Don Domingo Allende and Don Sebastian de Arramburu.

[An act of May 22, 1728, orders a compilation to be made of the
indulgences and other things, in order that the high estimation of the
popes and sovereigns for the brotherhood may be apparent. Indulgences
have been granted by Urban VIII, Clement XI (September 20, 1717),
and Innocent XIII; and the latter has also approved the Institute
of the brotherhood. The latter own various relics. One reliquary,
bearing the papal arms, and conserved in an elaborate golden pyx
which is deposited in a tabernacle on the altar of the assembly room
of the brotherhood, contains a bit of the wood of the holy cross,
a bit of the swaddling clothes in which the child Jesus was wrapped,
a bit of a bone of St. Isabel the mother of John the Baptist, a bit
of a bone of St. Ignatius Loyola, and a bit of a bone of St. Pasqual
Baylon. Other relics are another bit of the wood of the cross, a
bone of St. Felix, pope and martyr, a letter of St. Pedro Baptista,
O.S.F., who was martyred in Japan, and a shinbone of St. Christina,
virgin and martyr. In addition, the brotherhood bears the title
of Apostolic syndic of the seraphic Order of St. Francis, and as
such its brothers enjoy all the privileges and exemptions conceded
to that order by apostolic bulls, and all of the indulgences,
privileges, etc., for all the provinces of Nueva España subject to
the obedience of the father commissary-general of the order. The
royal decree of June 20, 1623, confirms the rules and regulations
of the brotherhood. In consequence of this decree, the brotherhood
presents a petition to the governor asking him as royal vice-patron
to confirm the rules and regulations. This is done by special act
on September 4, 1625 by Fernando de Silva. They have already been
approved by Francisco Tello, and Gabriel de la Cruz, schoolmaster
of the cathedral, January 24, 1597. The royal decree of September
7, 1699, inserted in the decree of June 11, 1708, grants exemption
from government or religious visit. Notwithstanding this decree, the
effort has been made without success to subject the brotherhood to
visit. The closest of supervision has been exercised by the brothers
themselves. All the documents mentioned above are given by our author.]



Chaplaincies with collation

There are twenty-nine chaplaincies with collation, of which
the Board of Santa Misericordia is patron. They were founded by
different benefactors, so that in accordance with the conditions and
clauses which were provided in their foundations, the board appoints
the chaplains who are to serve them. Such appointees taking the
appointments which it sends to them (in which the obligation which
falls to each one is made known to them) present themselves before
the proper persons within the term which the holy Council of Trent
prescribes, for the approval and collation of those chaplaincies. It
is intimated to them at this time that they must inform the board
promptly that they have fulfilled their so necessary obligation for
the good government which is demanded in this. An account must be kept
in a separate book of chaplaincies, in the form which is always usual.



Lay chaplaincies

The lay chaplaincies, of which the board is also patron, number
ten. They are filled in accordance with the clauses of their foundation
by the chaplains whom the board appoints to serve them; in whose
despatch a different style is followed since they are lay.



Becas of collegiates

In the royal college of San Joseph of this city, Captain Diego Gonzalez
de Arcos founded two becas with a capital of 4,000 pesos, making the
Board of Santa Misericordia patron of them, with the condition that
the sons of [men from] Estremadura, and especially those of Villa de
Don Benito be preferred. Their vacancies are reported by the reverend
father rector of the said college.



Number of brothers in this venerable brotherhood and other
circumstances

The founders and brothers of this brotherhood, considering the work
and business in which they had to employ themselves continually in
fulfilment of the works of charity, prudently decided and decreed
by a chapter of the ordinances that there should be 250 brothers for
the due fulfilment of all the ordinances, in whom good report, sane
conscience, honest life, fear of God, observance of His commandments,
and prompt obedience to all that should be of service to God and to the
brotherhood, and the relief of one's neighbor had to be included. They
declared that they should not be single, unless they had reached
the age of thirty, but that being virtuous persons and of the said
qualities, they might receive dispensation and be received as brothers
if they were twenty-five years old or upward. But no one who was not
an oldtime Christian, and no one who had any obligatory duties that
could prevent him from serving in the brotherhood [could be a member];
neither could those who did not know how to read or to write. Among
said 250 brothers would be always the management and government of
the house, and the election of the officers, with obligation to serve
God by those who should be elected and appointed by the purveyor and
brothers of the board if there were no legitimate obstacle to prevent
that. Before they should be admitted as brothers, the secretary
of the house was to enter in the book of the brotherhood that its
ordinances should be submitted to them, so that having seen and read
them, they might determine whether they could fulfil them. And if they
were questioned by the board in regard to them, and were found with
a mind resolved to observe them and to serve according to the rules
in the brotherhood, an oath was to be taken from them on the holy
gospels in a missal before the purveyor and brothers of the board,
to the effect that when they should hear the signal of the house,
or the bells, with the sign that had been arranged for the summoning
of the brothers, they should come to the house to perform the works
of charity in accordance with the orders that they should receive
from the purveyor and brothers of the board; and also if they were
summoned in the name of the aforesaid and there was no legitimate
obstacle. The above was to be a matter of conscience. They were also
to swear to keep the secrets of the board and the rules, when they
should be summoned by the board, and were obliged, notwithstanding
their oath, to recite fourteen Pater Nosters and fourteen Ave Marias
for the deceased brothers, and, having done that, they were to be
received as brothers, and their names to be inscribed in the book of
the brotherhood.



Annual alms given by the house of the Santa Misericordia of the city
of Manila

Since we have to furl the sails to this discourse, because of the
limits of time, and make an end to this small work in these last
chapters, I thought it important to first make an extract (although
with much labor) of all the alms and sums of pesos, produced by the
funds which are administered by the house of Santa Misericordia, during
the years when--all being complete, and no disaster of earthquakes
coming upon them, or shipwrecks or other accidents, which depend on
time--it distributes to the benefit of all this community. I was also
moved to this interesting task by making charts of all the funds and
their pious purposes, by having met in the first part of the life of
the venerable and most reverend father master, Fray Simon de Roxas,
a great servant of God and a member of the Order of the Santissima
Trinidad de Redemptores [i.e., the Most Holy Trinity of Redeemers]. [3]
written during the year 670 by the very reverend father master, Fray
Francisco de Arcos, preacher and theologue of his Majesty, and of
the tribunals of his royal conscience, etc., in which he refers to
a paragraph of a letter which Juan Baptista Labaña wrote during the
voyage from Portugal of Don Phelipe III (of happy memory), in which
he cited folio 16; and in the life of the said venerable father, a
description of the alms which the royal house of Santa Misericordia
of the court of Lisboa distributed in the year 619, and of those
which regularly and annually it distributes in the pious ends which
are contained in the said chapter, is found in book 8, chapter x,
pp. 418-420. It states that those alms are about 30,000 ducados
annually. Inasmuch as chapter xi of this work states that the alms
distributed by this house of Santa Misericordia of the city of Manila
amounted to about 70,000 pesos, I have determined to prove the said
proposition part by part, passing over the circumstances which are
found in the said chapter, and making a clear demonstration of their
reality, without failing one jot in the truth, which is required in a
matter of so great importance, and which has to yield in so great glory
to the Spanish monarchy. It is a pity that in the circumstances of the
present case, there should be many who opposed the truth as it did not
issue so clear and apparent in all the books of the house which treat
of this matter; and necessarily I am obliged to give it by imagining
charts which are fitting and do not leave the least reason for doubt.

This having been granted, therefore, I assert that the alms and sums
of pesos received by the holy cathedral church and the sacred orders
of this city, the beaterios, confraternities, the venerable tertiary
order, the house for sheltered women, the hospice of San Jacinto, the
colleges (without including that of Santa Misericordia, St. John of
God and its infirmary), the province of Camarines, and the Indians of
Marinas Islands, amount to 25,520 pesos. In the alms given for masses,
5,777 pesos are also distributed as a suffrage for the blessed souls
of purgatory; among the poor prisoners of this city, 2,691 pesos;
as a benefit to the school of Santa Isabel, which belongs to the
brotherhood, in the divine worship of its church, the salary of its
chaplains, servants of the house, support, clothing and other things
which are spent for the girl collegiates (the number of those at
present are 58 inmates, rectress, and portress, 9 wards, and 6 slave
women, who serve in it), and repairs of said school (in which alone
this present year about 6,000 pesos have been spent), they give and
apply 10,700 pesos; as dowries for the said girl collegiates and other
orphan daughters of noble parents of this city, 16,000 pesos; for the
relief of the necessities of poor Spaniards, widows, self-respecting
poor, 6,936 pesos. Besides these sums 3,000 pesos are set aside for
the benefit of the above-mentioned purposes which, with somewhat more,
are produced by the sums at interest, and also 1,200 pesos which are
yielded by the encomienda which his Majesty applied to the Board of
Santa Misericordia in the provinces of the Ylocos and Leite. Therefore
totaling up the eight items of pesos above applied, the amount is
71,824 pesos produced by the funds administered by this house, as is
adjusted with the greatest exactness. One may see by the sums that
result to the benefit of so many pious ends, the reality and truth
of the said proposition, and consequently, the great succor of silver
for the relief of the needs of its neighbor. Surely I believe that in
this small work of rich treasures, an extraordinary splendor for the
house must shine forth (with the new discovery of so abundant a mine,
which has been buried in silence in the extensive field and space
of 134 years); a prodigy which looks to Spain for the non-moderation
of this great house of Misericordia in the most remote parts of the
world. I believe that without injury to the greater (if it can be
that there is another which exceeds it), it merited as panegyrist of
its glories (although with more time) a nature suitable to its worth
and greatness. Lastly placed in the royal crown of España, it will
be one of the most precious stones which beautify that crown with
its rich splendor, for the greater honor and glory of God our Lord.








SURVEY OF THE FILIPINAS ISLANDS

[Part I]


[Title-page:] Relation in which, by order of his Catholic Majesty
(may God keep him) are set forth the towns, castles, forts, and
military posts of the provinces subject to his royal dominion in
the Philipinas islands. With sketches of their plans and detailed
accounts of the supplies, soldiers, wages, rations, and ammunition,
required to maintain them; the annual amount of these, and the product
of the incomes and amounts set aside for them from which they are
obtained. All these provinces are described, with information not
only of essential but of curious matters, with a summary of what
they yield for the royal treasury; an account of it is given, with
a general résumé of the fixed income and charges of the treasury,
drawn up by the field marshal, Don Fernando Valdés Tamón, in whose
charge is the government of these islands. In the year 1739. [4]





BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE CITY OF MANILA

The island of Luzon (it is also called Nueva Castilla) is the largest
of all those which submit to the Catholic crown in this Philippine
archipelago. Its figure is that of an arm somewhat doubled, and
the latest observations give it three hundred and fifty leguas of
circumference, and two hundred leguas of length. Its width cannot be
accurately stated, because the land is in some places broad and in
others narrow, although it is known that it is longer from the elbow
to the shoulder, and in that distance it is noticed that the greatest
width is forty-three leguas; and it is about twenty-two leguas from the
elbow to the hand of this imaginary arm. In this remotest part, then,
of the Spanish domain, in 14° 48' of northern latitude and 158° 38'
of eastern longitude, is situated Manila, [5] nearly in the middle of
its mainland, in the region of the elbow of its [imaginary] figure;
and there, as being the capital of all the Spanish possessions in
the Philipinas Islands, resides permanently the royal Audiencia
with its president the captain-general, the archiepiscopal see,
and other tribunals. The number of citizens who distinguish the city
is astonishingly small; these are the Spaniards who live within the
walls, and in the wards of Binondoc and Santa Cruz, which adjoin it;
and although in these places there is an astonishing number of people,
I have the idea that they are a contemptible rabble, excepting the
small number of the Spaniards. It was June 24, 1571, when Manila was
founded, and it recognizes as its founder the adelantado Miguel Lopez
de Legazpi--a hero in truth, worthy of the greatest praises for the
bravery, judgment, and good fortune by which he was distinguished in
these conquests.

The site which this town occupies [6] is a point of land on the shores
of the sea, in a bay thirty leguas in circumference; into this falls
a river of considerable size, which comes down from a lake distant
five leguas from the city on the eastern side--by which it flows,
surrounding the city, and in its progress washes its walls, until it
pours its waters through the bar.

Up to this time the secular government has been in charge of forty
governors, twenty-three of them proprietary, and seventeen ad
interim. The ecclesiastical government likewise has had one bishop
and thirteen archbishops. Both these numbers are carefully estimated
from the list of [those who have held] both dignities.

The fortifications with which this town is girt about are everywhere
of irregular shape, in accordance with the surface of the ground. Its
walls, although of masonry, are not regarded as inferior--if one
considers the good quality of the stone, which is easy to work on
account of being soft--to those of mud or brick. On the other hand,
I am persuaded that an injustice would be done to our walls if one
should deny them the advantage of the former kind and the solidity of
the latter, in view of their great resistance; for in the course of
more than a century since their construction, some slight decay has
been noticed only occasionally, and in places here and there little
sheltered from the salt winds; and this is remedied, or the wall is
preserved, by applying a thin coat of lime, an idea which has come as
the result of experience. Its circuit appears to be 12,498 Castilian
feet, both its extremities closing in with the castle of Santiago,
which, on account of its position, occupies in Manila the place of
the citadel.

The bastions in its circuit are twelve, all furnished with terreplein;
nine are small, and the others large, of the regular size. In one
of these last, named "San Andres," there is a powder-magazine,
bomb-proof, which the present governor caused to be constructed;
an incentive to building this was the little shelter afforded by a
mere shed in former times, and the exposed condition of its contents
to the shots of a besieger; these risks that were feared have ceased
at sight of the present fortification. There are two sentry-towers
incorporated with the said wall, and besides this there are a
ravelin and a crown-work. All this is a very respectable aggregate,
as contributing to the greatest defense of the city; the situation
of each of these defenses will be described in the proper place.

The gates of this city are six, two main entrances and four
posterns. Of these Santa Lucia and Palacio, which look toward the west,
allow passage to the shore--as also on the north side Santo Domingo and
Almacenes give passage to the river. The main gates are distinguished
by the names Real and Parian. The latter is situated in the middle
of the curtain which faces the northeast between the San Lorenzo
and San Gabriel bastions; and inside of it is its guard-station,
capacious enough to lodge a company of men. Corresponding to the
empty space below, in the upper part it has a spacious sentry-tower,
furnished with some cannons, which, by favor of its sides defends the
collateral bulwarks--a fortification which, it may be supposed, was
placed here in order to make up for the defect of the extraordinary
length of this curtain.

The outer works of this are thus composed: a crown-work, which masks
the gate; a fausse-braye [falsabraga], which extends from the flank of
the bastion San Gabriel, until it almost reaches the said gate, there
leaving room for a little bridge for communication with the crown-work
already mentioned; a ditch, of which we shall treat further on; its
covered way, parapet, and palisade, with its esplanade, the whole
regularly surrounded, so far as the narrowness of the place permits;
and at its foot a quagmire, which serves as an outer ditch. At the
end of this, and along its outer margin, extending toward the south,
there is a grand highway, which at its beginning is joined with another
but small road, which lies between the outer ditch and the river;
and both of these connect with a little bridge, next to a small fort
which was erected for the guards stationed at the large bridge which,
close by, crosses the river.

The ditch of the half-curtain (of which mention was reserved for this
place, in order to avoid confusion) is formed by the waters which
overflow from the river at the rise of the tides. It starts from the
angle defended by the bastion San Gabriel, and extends until it is
very near the Parian gate, with a counterscarp--which there leaves
it, bending toward the crown-work, and thus is left almost isolated,
with a small arm. This, a little farther, adds all its waters, as
if on deposit, to the outer ditch already mentioned. Not thus the
main ditch; for this, overflowing the right side according to the
amount of water which it receives [from the river], continues its
course along the margin of the grand highway, more or less closely
according to its curves, until, coming close to the walls, it ends
its course round about them, close to the bastion San Diego. At this
place art has imposed restraints on it, having in mind, no doubt,
the frequent inundations to which that vicinity would be exposed
if (as was easy for it) this ditch should come to unite its waters
with the sea. From this measure of prudence resulted two benefits of
special importance, in which both the fortified post and the public
are directly interested--the former, on account of the advantage which
it enjoys (as may be seen in the plan) in the fact that the ditch
serves it as a moat on the eastern and southern sides; and the latter,
because it is utilized for the great number of vessels which, aided by
the rising tide, come up to the Puerta Real to discharge their lading.

This is one of the two principal gates already mentioned. It is located
on the southern side of this town, in the curtain which defends the
bastions San Diego and San Andres, although nearer to the latter; and
it much resembles the gate of the Parian (although built in different
style) in its convenience and its fortifications--for it has, like
the former, a guard-station and watchtower, similarly arranged and
equipped. It is only noted that this curtain, peculiar among all,
is the only one which is furnished with terreplein; for this reason
some cannons (which defense the others lack) have been placed in it.

Its other exterior works, arranged according to their order, are
reduced to a bridge that can be raised, a moat with its counterscarp
faced with stone [revestido], and at a little distance a ravelin in
condition for defense--notwithstanding which, on account of masking
the gate it is not found in front of the half of the curtain which
was its proper place. Although this gate had the remaining features
of covered way, parapet, palisade, and esplanade, they were entirely
in ruins at the time when this government began--which induced us to
plan them anew, in modern style, and of much better quality than were
the old ones.

All the curtains which face the western and northern part of this
fortress are, without question, the weakest part of its defenses;
but on the supposition (which is believed to be a remote contingency)
that European armies may move to attack it in earnest--and it may be
regarded as an enormous undertaking by our enemies here, who are most
laughable on account of their lack of discipline and of forts--the
natural defenses are apparently even more than sufficient. For it has
on the west the waters of the bay for a moat, and on the north a river
that is broad and deep; and with this all fears may be laid aside.

There is also maintained in this city, at the expense of the royal
treasury (as being a necessity), a foundry for artillery, grenades,
and cannon balls of all calibers; and an iron-furnace, where men are
continually forging, according to the occasion, many hand-weapons and
some firearms. The metals for these are transported from countries
beyond the sea. Besides these, a scant half-legua to the south, is the
powder-factory, which is enclosed by a triangular redoubt of stone
and mortar, with seven mounted iron cannons, and fortified by three
demi-bastions. This factory supplies gunpowder to Manila and the forts
dependent on it; to the ships of his Majesty which sail annually to the
port of Acapulco and the Marianas Islands; to the armadas which, when
any danger from enemies arises, are made ready on the opposite shore;
and to the public festivals. More than enough to cover the expense is
received from those who wish to buy it, to whom it is furnished for
their money. The ingredients of its composition are produced in the
country, except the saltpetre, which is brought from foreign countries.



Artillery, mounted and dismounted, of this fort, with whatever is
necessary for handling it


    Bronze cannons      Caliber   Iron      Caliber
                                  cannons

      1                       3         2         2
      1                       4        13         4
      1                       5         6         5
      2                       8        10         6
      1                       9        11         8
      1                      14         4        10
      1                      16         4        12
     15                       8         4        14
      7                      20         5        18
      3                      22         4        20
      2                      24         2        30
      6                      25
      2   stone-mortars,     90
          for moat-guards
     --                                --
     43 bronze cannons                 65 iron cannons


Military supplies kept in reserve, independent of those used in
actual service


    20,370 iron cannon-balls, as reserve for the said artillery.
        18 bronze stone-mortars, with their chambers.
         5 iron esmerils.
         4 iron pinzotes.
       458 match-lock arquebuses.
       409 flint-lock guns and [hand-] cannons, with bayonets.
        34 pairs of pistols.
        20 blunderbusses, bronze and iron.
     2,267 short swords, cutlasses, and broadswords.
     1,097 iron grenades.
    50,342 lead bullets, of suitable size.
       800 arrobas of gunpowder, kept in reserve.


The fighting men who serve in the said royal camp of Manila comprise
nine companies of Spanish infantry. The first is under command of the
captain-general; the second, of the master-of-camp; the third, of the
sargento-mayor; and the rest, under six captains who are appointed
by this government. Each company has its alférez, its sergeant, and
also its minor posts of page, standard-bearer, fifer and drummer;
and, in all, there are six hundred and seventy-five soldiers. There
are also a captain and thirteen halberdiers, the personal guard
of the governor and captain-general; two paid adjutants, and seven
supernumeraries; one deputy-commander of artillery, with his head
gunner, and thirty-six artillerists. There is a military engineer,
and an overseer of the royal works; and there are masters and a
suitable number of workmen for casting artillery, operating forges,
and making gunpowder. There are also, to serve as workmen in the said
shops, a company of Pampango infantry, with their captain, alférez,
sergeant, standard-bearer, and two hundred and forty-three regular
soldiers--more or less, according to circumstances.

The wages and rations of the said soldiers are paid monthly, excepting
the captain-general, who receives his pay every four months and at
the rate of 8,000 pesos (each of 450 maravedis of silver) a year. The
amount each one receives is stated thus:

Officers: The master-of-camp, 137 pesos, 6 tomins; the sargento-mayor,
30 p.; the six captains, each 15 p.; the captain of the guard, 24 p.;
the deputy commander of artillery, 25 p.; the military engineer,
25 p.; the overseer of works, 20 p.; two paid adjutants, each 8
p.; the seven supernumeraries, each 6 p.; the alferezes, each 4 p.;
the sergeants, each 3 p.; the head gunner of the artillery, 8 p.;
the Pampango captain, 4 p., 4 t.; his alférez, and his sergeant,
each 2 p., 4 t.

Soldiers: The Spanish soldiers, each 2 pesos; the halberdiers, each
3 p.; the artillerists, each 2 p.; the drum-major, 3 p.; the pages,
standard-bearers, one fifer, and the other drummer, each 2 p.; the
Pampango soldiers, each 1 p., 2 t., and some of them have extra pay;
one Pampango standard-bearer, with [blank] p., 6 tomins.

To all the above are furnished respectively a ration of rice,
excepting the captain of the guard, the engineer, and the overseer
of works--for which purpose are used 7,4543 1/2 fanegas of rice
a year--and the wages amount annually to 34,139 pesos, 3 tomins;
the latter are paid from the royal treasury of Manila, which, as it
has to meet the other charges which are imposed on the amount of the
royal revenues, has not, it is acknowledged, funds adequate for this
purpose, as will be made manifest in the proper place.



THE CASTLE OF SANTIAGO

It has a circuit of 2,030 feet; its shape is almost triangular. Its
fortifications on the southern side, which faces the city, include
a curtain with terreplein, flanked by two demi-bastions; it has a
fausse-braye, and a ditch which communicates with the river. On the
northern side, toward the entrance of the ditch, in place of a bastion
is raised a cavalier with three faces or batteries; one of these
fronts the sea (the anchorage included), another the said entrance,
and the third the river itself. This last side of the cavalier
joins a large tower of the same height as the walls; and through the
tower there is a descent to a semi-circular platform or battery, at
the level of the water, with which the aforesaid triangular figure
of this castle is completed. Through these sides the fort has the
necessary communication with the city, through its principal gate,
which faces that way; with the river, and with the shore or beach
of the sea, by a postern gate which furnishes passage to it. All the
above will be better understood by referring to the proper plan folio
[blank in MS.] where also will be found, placed in their order, the
guard-stations, the barracks of the troops who garrison it, and the
quarters of the warden and his subalterns. The reduced size of the
plan has not allowed room for showing other buildings distinctly, such
as the chapel, various storehouses (among these the powder-magazine,
which is bomb-proof), the dungeons, the reservoirs of water, etc.



Artillery mounted and dismounted, with the necessary articles for
its handling


    Bronze cannons      Caliber   Iron      Caliber
                                  cannons

       4                      2         1         3
       2                      4         1         4
       1                      6         1         5
       3                      8         1         6
       1                     10         2        16
       3                     16         2        25
       8                     18         4        32
       3                     20
       4                     25
      --                               --
      29 bronze cannons                12 iron cannons


Reserve supplies


    1,534 iron cannon-balls, kept in reserve for the said artillery.
        1 bronze mortar, carrying a 300-libra ball.
       95 muskets.
       85 match-lock arquebuses.
    3,414 balls for these guns.
      161 grenades.
       80 bar-shots.
       80 lanterns (a contrivance for [using] fire and stone).
      148 Turkish swords, pikes, broad daggers, hand-spikes, lances,
          and gun-forks.
      200 arrobas of gunpowder, kept in reserve.


The troops in the regular garrison of the said castle are composed
of one company of Spanish infantry, commanded by the warden (who is
appointed by his Majesty), with a lieutenant-commander, an orderly
aide-de-camp, an alférez, a sergeant, and five minor posts--those of
page, standard-bearer, fifer, and two drummers. It has sixty regular
soldiers, one head gunner, and twelve artillerymen. The fort has also,
as workmen in the shops, Pampango soldiers in a company of infantry,
with their captain, alférez, sergeant, the three minor posts of
standard-bearer, fifer, and drummer, and ninety regular soldiers,
three of them receiving extra pay.

The wages and rations of the said troops are paid monthly, in the
form which is shown in the following schedule:

Officers: The warden, 66 pesos, 5 tomins; his lieutenant, 15 p.;
the aide-de-camp, 5 p., 6 t.; the alférez, 4 p.; the sergeant, 3 p.;
the head gunner, 4 p.; the Pampango captain, 6 p.; the alférez and
the sergeant, each 2 p., 4 t.

Soldiers: The sixty Spanish soldiers, each 2 pesos; the twelve
artillerymen, each 2 p.; the page, the standard-bearer, the fifer,
and the drummers, each 2 p.; the Pampango soldiers, and the men in
the minor posts, each 1 p., 2 t.

These wages amount in the year to 4,595 pesos in cash; and the rice,
of which rations are issued to all, to 1,219 1/2 fanegas. All this
expense is met from the royal treasury and storehouses of Manila;
the exact statement regarding it will be found at the end.



DESCRIPTION OF CAVITE

In sight of Manila, and south-southeast of it, at a distance of
three leguas by way of the waters of the bay, and six short leguas by
land--in 14° 31' of north latitude, and 158° 38' of east longitude--is
the port of Cavite, which is formed by a tongue of land, curved from
east to west; it is 5,100 feet long, and 1,200 feet broad. It is
the ordinary anchorage for the ships of his Majesty and of private
persons, as well as for the pataches belonging to the commerce of the
various Oriental peoples, who come here to carry it on every year,
at regular times.

Its population is composed of the soldiers who garrison its castle,
and those of other posts; the sea-faring men who serve in the vessels
of the [Acapulco] trade-route, and in various other vessels, in the
royal service; and the men who compose the force of the navy-yard,
for the repair and the building of ships. Among so many, the citizens
of most prominence are the pilots, boatswains, and other officers of
the ships and the Ribera. The entire government--political, military,
and social--is in the hands of a warden and chief magistrate, who is
not responsible to any one except the captain-general.

Its principal fortification consists of the fort San Phelipe, the
shape of which is an irregular quadrilateral; it is situated toward
the point of the Ribera, at a distance from it of about 1,100 feet. It
has four bastions with orillons, in old style; its western curtain,
in which is its gate, has a fausse-braye; and its southern curtain,
on the shore of the Ribera, has a barbette battery of twenty mounted
cannons. A similar account of the two remaining curtains is omitted,
because in them there is nothing new for notice. The circuit of
the fort is 1,410 feet; and within it are located, in due order,
lodgings sufficient for the soldiers in its garrison, an armory,
a powder-magazine, a water reservoir, and other offices necessary to
the service.

On the western side, which is contiguous with the village of San Roque,
this fort is also fortified by a curtain 540 feet long, which, with
the two large towers which flank it, occupies the entire width of
the tongue of land, and, with a revetted moat, leaves Cavite almost
isolated; it would be feasible to make it entirely so by the union
of the two bodies of seawater--with experience of fatal results,
if the double defense of a counterscarp were not interposed. This
curtain has, as a mask to its gate, a half-star work with its own
gate, which is the one that people call Puerta Vaga; and these two
entrances furnish, for the said town and Manila, the only passage by
land that is found in this port.

To this fortification is added another, and of no less importance,
the necessity of which was made evident by warnings; and the plan of
its structure was thought out by experience. For, having noted in less
than fifty years the repeated ravages caused in this port, on the north
side, by the violence of the sea when driven by the north winds--which
indicated its entire destruction in the future--the superior government
decided to construct a stable barrier, by which the so great damage
that was feared might be prevented. This was carried out by the
engineer then in charge, by constructing in the water a barrier of
stone and mortar, large enough to be able to resist such attacks,
and of height equal to that of the highest tides, on a foundation of
pile-work and beams. This work extended from the point of the Ribera,
on the side which was endangered, until it reached the northern tower
of the curtain which is mentioned in the preceding paragraph--that is,
the entire length of Cavite. Upon this breakwater he raised a parapet
with its banquette, in which were formed the bastions, demi-bastions,
flanks and curtains, as this line gave opportunity, and in the plan
of Cavite they are indicated; but all these works were at the level
of the water. For its greater permanency, command was given to cast
into the water outside, at the foot of the pile-work, a number of
stone-heaps; since these are always multiplying themselves, an evident
benefit has resulted.

The arms and supplies for the maintenance of these forts are those
which here are scheduled.



Artillery, mounted and dismounted, in the port of Cavite, with all
that is necessary for its handling


    Bronze cannons      Caliber   Iron      Caliber
                                  cannons

     10                       1         6         1
      1                       2        43         2
      1                       3         9         3
      1                       4        21         4
      2                       6        46         6
     26                       8        25         8
      4                      10        35        10
     15                      12        15        12
      4                      14         8        14
      1                      16         1        16
     19                      18        41        18
     10                      25         1        20
      7                      30
      2                      35
      2                      40
      1   stone-mortar,
          of 300 libras.
    ---                               ---
    109 bronze cannons.               257 iron cannons.


Military supplies kept in reserve, independent of those used in
actual service


       2 esmerils of bronze, of 8-onza caliber.
       4 small iron cannon, of the same caliber.
     101 swivel-guns, with 216 chambers and quoins, of iron.
  16,905 iron cannon-balls, suitable for the said artillery.
     207 bar-shots of iron, "diamond point."
      67 iron crowbars.
      22 iron angelots. [7]
     190 iron grenades.
     142 muskets.
     221 match-lock arquebuses.
      16 guns, some with bayonets.
       9 pistols.
       1 blunderbuss.
   6,672 balls corresponding to these weapons--2,910 of iron, 62
         angel--[i.e., double-headed] shot, and the rest of lead.
     480 hand-weapons--Turkish swords, broadswords, cutlasses
         [machetes], lances, pikes, halberds, partisans, half-moons,
         spears, languinatas, and spontoons.
     400 arrobas of gunpowder, kept in reserve.


The fighting men of the said port of Cavité and its fortress (who
are in one body, just as the above-mentioned supplies are considered
collectively) comprise three companies of Spanish infantry--one
commanded by the warden, another by the sargento-mayor, and another by
a captain--with 180 soldiers in all, with their leading officers and
minor posts. There is also a captain of artillery, with twenty-four
artillerymen; the deputy of the castellan; three orderlies; two
carpenters for the gun-carriages of the artillery; and one military
notary. There is, besides, a company of Pampango infantry with
its master-of-camp, sargento-mayor, and other officers, with two
hundred and twenty regular soldiers, one hundred and twenty of whom
are assigned to work as sawyers. All the officers and soldiers, both
Spaniards and Pampangos (except the warden and the notary) receive
a suitable ration of rice and their pay in cash monthly. The wages
amount to 11,500 pesos, and the rations to 3,084 fanegas of rice. These
are furnished from the royal treasury and the storehouses in Manila,
according to the list here set down.

Officers: The warden, 100 pesos; the sargento-mayor, 25 p.; one
captain of Spanish infantry, 15 p.; the alferezes, each 4 p.; the
sergeants, each 3 p.; one captain of artillery, 15 p.; the deputy of
the castellan, 15 p.; three orderlies, each 6 p.; one military notary,
8 p.; the Pampango master-of-camp, 10 p.; the sargento-mayor of that
people, 6 p., 4 t.; the alférez, sergeant, and adjutant of the said
nation, each 2 p., 4 t.

Soldiers: The Spanish soldiers, each 2 pesos; the pages,
standard-bearers, drummers, and fifer, each 2 p.; the artillerymen,
each 2 p.; two carpenters for the artillery, each 2 p.; minor posts in
the Pampango company--standard-bearer, fifer, and drummer--each [blank]
p., 6 t.; 220 Pampango soldiers, each 1 p., 2 t. Of the Pampangos the
following receive extra pay, with the title of sawyers: three each,
4 p.; another, 2 p., 4 t.; another, 2 p.; and eighteen others, each
1 p., 4 t.

The place which is now called "Ribera of Cavité" includes all the
ground from the point of Cavité to Fort San Phelipe. All this is
enclosed, with two gates, [which are] at the angles flanked by the
bastions--that of the powder-magazine on the northern side, and by that
of Cháchara [i.e., "Chit-chat"] on the southern side. Although these
passages had formerly been open, it was considered best to shut them
off thus, in order to check the frequent thefts that were committed of
nails and other furnishings at times when ships were being repaired or
built; but in doing so a narrow strip was left, in order to furnish a
path for the work-people from the Ribera, thus forming the barbette
battery; and this strip has preserved the principal curtain of the
fort from the continual former lashings of the waves of the sea.

On this Ribera is located the shipyard, where the galleons, pataches,
galleys, and galliots of his Majesty are constructed into ships;
also here is the bridge which is used for careening the said ships,
and others that belong to private persons. It also includes the royal
iron-works, where are forged the iron tools and instruments, of all
kinds and sizes, that are necessary for the said construction; and
the workshops of the various artisans who are daily at work on this
Ribera. There are separate storehouses for the masts, anchors, cables,
rigging, and other kinds of cordage; for cannon, and for gun-carriages;
and generally for all the military supplies and nautical equipments,
with the dwelling-houses of their principal officers. All this was
built by the present government, and with so good management that in
a short time, and without confusion, everything necessary for this
purpose was constructed, repaired, or equipped. Other royal buildings
which are not included in the Ribera are indicated on the chart of
this port, for which reason I omit notice of each.

All this arrangement for the navy-yard of the Ribera, although it is
planned for the benefit of all vessels, whether native or foreign,
is chiefly designed for those of his Catholic Majesty, and more
especially for the galleons which annually make the voyage to Nueva
España; these are built, equipped, and supplied in this port and
Ribera. A sufficiently detailed account of these will be given in
the following lists.



Ribera of Cavité

Master workmen in the navy-yard: one captain of the Point, yearly,
300 pesos; one alférez of the seamen, 120 p.; one sergeant of the said
men, 90 p.; four corporals, and one watchman, 180 p.; two chief pilots,
240 p.; two assistant pilots, 192 p.; one examiner and inspector of the
royal works of the port, 300 p.; one constable for the storehouse of
provisions, 120 p.; one surgeon, 96 p.; one coxswain of the galley,
120 p.; one chaplain for the galley, 180 p.; one foreman of the
royal iron-works, 300 p.; one foreman of rope-making, 120 p.; one
foreman of the cooper shop, 240 p.; one foreman for the artisans [8]
of the artillery, 120 p.; another overseer of the aforesaid, 30 p.;
one head overseer of the carpenters, 360 p.; another, his assistant,
300 p.; one director of works, 300 p. All, except the father chaplain,
receive rations of rice.

Workmen in the navy-yard: 226 seamen (of whom 16 serve as captains),
with different rates of pay according to their various employments,
and, with corresponding rations of rice; this amounts each year to
5,201 p., 4 t., 6 granos; 166 common seamen, with the same pay and
ration of rice, yearly 2,490 pesos; to the convicts on the royal
galleys are issued rations of 516 cavans of clean rice, which with 22
p., 4 t. for oil for the lanterns, and 300 p. a year for fish, salt,
and vinegar, will be worth 580 p.; eight ropemakers, with rations of
rice and different rates of pay according to their different kinds
of work, amounting yearly to 198 p.; 16 coopers, with different
rates of pay and rations of rice, receive yearly 351 p., 9 granos;
152 men for using the augers, at various rates of pay, including rice,
receive yearly 3,920 p., 4 t.; tool-grinders, at various rates of pay,
receive yearly, including the value of the rice, 594 p.; 305 artisans
[pandayes] (15 of them in the artillery), with various rates of pay,
and the amount of the ration of rice, receive yearly 372 [9] p.; 33
painters (two in the artillery), according to their different rates of
pay, with rations, 495 p.; 135 blacksmiths, with rations and various
rates of pay, amount to 4,644 p.; 31 Lascars, barraqueros, [10] at
different rates of pay, receive annually 709 p.; 16 carpenters, at
various rates of pay, with the value of their rations, receive 1,452
p.; 4 overseers, at various rates of pay, with rations, 300 p.; the
hand-sawyers and the calkers (not only natives, but Sangleys) receive,
according to the day-wages for which they work, without a ration of
rice, wages amounting in one year to 14,922 p., 3 t., 6 granos; the
galagaleros, [11] the Indians who work in repartimiento as ropemakers
and woodcutters, and the raftsmen, at various rates of pay according
to their work, and in rice, receive each year 2,714 p., 1 t.

All the aforesaid people in the navy-yard on the Ribera of Cavité
receive yearly 49,948 p., 3 t., 8 granos, in which is included the
value of 26,174 cavans, 11 gantas of rice, which is consumed in the
rations given to each person; but from this are excluded the father
chaplain, the sawyers, and the calkers. This amount, in summary form,
is the same which the royal officials now certify, omitting the details
of each item on account of the great prolixity which would be caused
by stating the various assignments of pay which correspond to the
various offices and work, and reserving the full statement for the
annual report with which the royal officials fulfil their duty.

Preparation of the ships: Since the chief employ of the navy-yard at
the Ribera at Cavité is the building and equipment of his Majesty's
ships, and, specifically, those which are annually despatched to Nueva
España with the merchandise that is allowed to that commerce and for
the royal situado--in which construction is expended the amount from
the royal treasury already mentioned--to it also belong the expenses
of the entire outfit for the ships, the pay of the naval and military
officers, great and small, the men for the crews, and the provision
of necessary supplies. As regards expense caused by these things,
it is included in the certification of the royal officials in their
general statement of purchases; this brief relation refers the reader
to that account, avoiding the annoyance of so long a schedule, and
here is given only the list of the men assigned to this employ--the
computation being now made from the two pataches, the flagship and
the almiranta, which in the year 1736 were manned in this form:

Officers of the ships: The commander of the flagship ("Nuestra
Señora de Cabdalonga") with salary of 4,125 pesos; the captain of
the almiranta ("Nuestra Señora del Pilar") 2,750 p.; the chaplains
of the two pataches, each 75 p., 150 p.; two chief pilots, each 300
p., 600 p.; two assistant pilots, each 150 p., 300 p.; two mates,
each 150 p., 300 p.; two head gunners, each 150 p., 300 p.; two
boatswains, each 150 p., 300 p.; two carpenters, each 150 p., 300 p.;
two calkers, each 150 p., 300 p.; two divers, each 150 p., 300 p.;
two notaries, each 100 p., 200 p.; two storekeepers, each 100 p.,
200 p.; two surgeons, each 100 p., 200 p.; two stewards, each 100 p.,
200 p.; two water-guards, each 100 p., 200 p.; two additional pilots,
each 150 p., 300 p. Total, 11,025 pesos.

The men of the crews: 64 artillerymen, each 100 p., amount to 6,400
p.; 160 mariners in the crews of the said pataches, at the rate of
75 p. each, 12,000 p.; 72 Spanish common seamen in the said crews,
at the rate of 50 p. each, 3,600 p.; 120 deck-hands in the said crews
at 25 p., 3,000 p.; extra pay issued to the royal official timekeeper,
who made these payments, 25 p. Total, 25,025 pesos.

Adding together these amounts for pay of officers and crews, the
total is 36,050 pesos.



DESCRIPTION OF FORT SAN PEDRO IN THE CITY OF SANTISSIMO NOMBRE DE
JESUS, IN ZEBÛ

In the island of Zebû, which is regarded as the center of all the
islands of Pintados--it is thirty leguas long, twelve wide, and
eighty in circuit--is the city of Santissimo Nombre de Jesus. It is
the capital of this province, wherein, amid the evident ruins of
its former opulence, is preserved, close to the city, the fort of
San Pedro. It is built of stone and mortar, with a terreplein, and is
situated on a point on the shore of the sea, in 10° of north latitude,
and 161° 47' of east longitude; [12] it is distant from the capital,
Manila, ninety-six leguas to the southeast, and is five degrees south
of that city.

The shape of this fort is triangular, with three bastions having
straight flanks; it is 1,248 feet in circuit. Its curtains are of
unequal length, and in that one which fronts the city, toward the
northwest, is the gate of the fort. This is masked by an outer work
of stakes, of square shape, with its gate to the city; and a palisade
extends the whole length of the curtain, in the form of a fausse-braye.

This fort contains the necessary buildings, as they are indicated on
its plan; it has also arms and soldiers, as herewith stated.



Arms and supplies

      13 pieces of bronze artillery, caliber 2 and 4.
      18 iron cannons, caliber 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 10, and 14.
       2 bronze mortars, with iron pivots.
       6 bronze stone-mortars.
      12 chambers.
      50 pinzotes.
     250 arquebuses and muskets.
   1,826 iron balls for the artillery.
  14,055 lead balls for the muskets, arquebuses, and pinzotes.
     294 grenades.
     500 arrobas of gunpowder, with small-arms and hand weapons, are
         kept in reserve, as is certified by the royal officials.


All the above, with the clothing [for the soldiers], and the
replenishment of arms and gunpowder, is provided from the capital,
Manila, in accordance with the orders of this government.




The military force

A captain of Spanish infantry, who is the alcalde-mayor, with
monthly pay of 25 pesos; an alférez of the said company, with 3 p.;
a sergeant, 2 p.; an orderly, 4 p.; a lieutenant of the fort, 4 p.;
57 regular soldiers, each 1 p.; 4 minor posts--page, fifer, drummer,
and standard-bearer, each 1 p.; 6 artillerymen, each 1 p.; a captain
of the Pampango company, 4 p.; his alférez, 1 p., 4 t.; the sergeant,
1 p.; twenty [Pampango] soldiers, and three minor posts--page,
drummer, and standard-bearer--each 4 t.; one position as overseer
of the iron-forge, 3 p.; two others, as shoremaster and overseer of
buildings, 2 p.; another as pilot, 1 p. Each one of the said persons
receives a monthly allowance of half a fanega (which is one cavan)
of rice.

The maintenance of this military post amounts to 1,584 pesos and 624
fanegas of rice every year; this expense is paid out of the proceeds
of the tributes and other revenues which are collected on his Majesty's
account in the said province of Zebû.



DESCRIPTION OF FORT NUESTRA SEÑORA DEL PILAR AT SAMBOANGAN

This fort is in the town of Samboangan, [13] a separate jurisdiction
with a chief magistrate, who is the governor of this military post. It
is situated in the great island of Mindanao, near the promontory
which is called Punta de la Caldera, in 7° 4' north latitude, and
160° 30' east longitude; [14] it is distant from the capital, Manila,
134 1/2 leguas south by east, and four degrees to the east.

This fort is constructed of stone and mortar, with a terreplein, at
the entrance of the town, on the sea-shore; the beach surrounds it on
the eastern and southern sides, along which it has also, externally,
a palisade. On the western side, where the gate is, it has a marsh
for a moat; and on the northern side, which faces the dwellings,
it has an artificial moat.

Its shape is that of a rectangle, with four full bastions--three with
straight flanks, and one with an orillon; it has a circuit of 820 feet,
and in it are enclosed the necessary buildings, as the plan shows.

The town has its own special fortifications; for on the eastern
side it has a long curtain of palisades, in the midst of which there
is a semicircular platform, which defends it. On the northern side
there is a long curtain of stone and mortar, flanked at the east by
a bastion with orillon, called Santa Cathalina; and at the west by
a cavalier of rectangular shape, called Santa Barbara. This curtain
has its palisade, which ends on the western side of this town, at
some distance from the said cavalier; and the rest of this said side
has some marshes for defense. The said wall and curtain of this town
is surrounded by a canal, full of water, ten or twelve feet wide;
and it connects with the said marshes.

The arms, supplies, and soldiers with which this military post is
maintained and defended are stated in the following lists:



Arms and supplies of this post

        24 bronze cannons, of caliber 1, 2, 3, 4, and 12.
         1 bronze culverin, caliber 4.
         1 mortar of the same, caliber 18.
        45 iron cannons, calibers 1, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, and 18.
        17 stone-mortars of the same [material], calibers 3 and 4.
        58 chambers.
         8 blunderbusses, 5 of bronze and 3 of iron.
        11 pinzotes.
       253 guns, muskets, and arquebuses.
       698 grenades, loaded and unloaded.
         1 pair of pistols.
         2 short carbines [terzerolas].
     8,407 lead and iron balls, suitable for the artillery.
    39,104 lead balls, for the arquebuses, guns, and muskets.
       500 arrobas of gunpowder, as regular supply.


Other weapons, for hand use, minor supplies, and all the rest that is
necessary for handling [the artillery], are enumerated in a separate
certified statement by the royal officials.



Military force in the post of Samboangan

One captain of the first company of the Spanish infantry, a post which
is held by the governor of this town, with a monthly salary of 50
pesos; its alférez, 4 p.; its sergeant, 3 p.; an aide-de-camp, 6 p.; 74
Spanish soldiers, each 2 p.; three minor posts--page, standard-bearer,
and drummer--each 2 p. The captain of the second Spanish company,
15 p.; its alférez, 4 p.; its sergeant, 3 p.; 68 soldiers, and
three minor posts--page, drummer, and standard-bearer--each 2 p. The
captain of the third Spanish company, who commands the armada, 15
p.; its alférez, 4 p.; its sergeant, 3 p.; 58 soldiers, and 3 minor
posts--page, standard-bearer, and drummer--each 2 p. A head gunner
for the artillery, 4 p.; a lieutenant and paymaster for this post,
15 p.; a surgeon, 5 p.; a notary for this post, 3 p.; 2 amanuenses,
hired by the day, each 3 p., 6 t.; 2 chaplains for the infantry, by the
year, each 100 p. A captain of the company of Pampango infantry, with
monthly pay of 4 p., 4 t.; its alférez, 2 p., 4 t.; its sergeant, 2 p.,
4 t.; 100 Pampango soldiers, each 1 p., 2 t.; 2 minor posts--page, and
standard-bearer--each 6 t. One master armorer, 3 p.; 2 skilled tilers,
each 2 p., 4 t.; 15 supernumerary seamen, paid at various rates, by
the month, [blank]. All these people receive a suitable ration of rice.



Coastguard galleys at Samboangan

At this post are maintained, as a measure of precaution by this
superior government since the past year of 1730, two coastguard galleys
(a flagship and an almiranta), with [a crew of] 96 impressed men
[forzados], and with all the supplies necessary for their outfit;
care is also taken to repair and fortify them. They have been kept up
as an armament necessary at this time for checking the insolence of
the neighboring Moros, who attack the villages of the territory under
the royal crown. In regard to the maintenance of these galleys, and the
amount of supplies and the number of soldiers and sailors [required for
them], although all this is found included in the expenditures of the
royal treasury as actual expenses it must be borne in mind that they
are not perpetual, but accidental and extraordinary, according to the
movements of our enemies. For this reason, these items of expense are
sometimes included and sometimes omitted in the statements of accounts,
according to the differences of time and occasion.



Galliots at Samboangan

More permanent at this post are the two galliots which are, by act
of the general council of the treasury, maintained there since the
year 1729, as necessary in those seas, so rough and so infested
with enemies, for transporting from the province of Ogtong and the
storehouses of Yloylo the rice and other provisions which are needed
in this post [of Samboangan]. The amount needed for the pay of these
seamen is sent from the royal treasury of Manila.

The entire maintenance of this post of Samboangan amounts each year
to 12,592 pesos, 2 tomins, and 7,108 cavans (which are 3,554 fanegas)
of rice, according to the last balancing of the accounts. To meet
this expense, a situade is sent from the royal treasury of Manila, the
number of pesos corresponding to the amount of the fixed charges, and
to that of the accidental expenses when there are any. The clothing,
gun-powder, supplies for replenishing the storehouses, cordage and
sails, other supplies for vessels, supplies for the hospital and
other offices of that post--all these are provided from the royal
storehouses of Manila; while from those of Yloylo is sent the rice
for the rations, with other foodstuffs, in which that province abounds.

In order to meet the said expenses, there is set aside the value of
the ganta of clean rice which was offered, contributed as a gift,
by every whole tribute (of two persons) in the provinces subject
to the royal crown--those of Balayan, Mindoro, Caraga, Marivelez,
Calamianes, and Cavite being exempted from this contribution--the
amount of which is regularly more than 3,500 pesos a year. For the
said expenses is also applied the value of the wine monopoly, which,
at the rate of the last sale to the highest bidder, produces 25,000
pesos annually. To this is added the amount of the pay, rations, and
supplies of the officers and soldiers who, at the time when this post
was reëstablished, were detailed to serve in it, from those of Cavite,
Yloylo, and Zebû.






[Part II]

THE ECCLESIASTICAL ESTATE


[Title-page:] The ecclesiastical estate in the aforesaid Philipinas
islands: Its archbishopric and its suffragan bishops, and the
territory which each one includes. Their cathedrals, with the
dignities, canonries, and prebends, with which they are endowed;
the stipends and offerings which they receive; and the amounts
allotted to the other churches, colleges, and hospitals in the
district. Active encomiendas which are at this present time enjoyed
by the various corporations and by private persons; and those in
which the tributes are collected on his Majesty's account for the
objects to which they were granted. Missions established, with a
statement of their locations and the expenses which they occasion:
settlements of Indians who have been subdued, distinguishing the
ministries, conducted by the secular ecclesiastics and the religious;
the neophytes whom they direct; what they receive on account of this,
not only on his Majesty's account, but from the natives themselves,
with a summary of the total of both. Added to this relation by Don
Pablo Francisco Rodriguez de Berdozido, accountant, royal official
for his Majesty in these Philipinas Islands, and the senior official
of those who have appointments in the royal treasury therein. In the
year 1742.



The holy cathedral church of Manila

It has its archbishopric, the jurisdiction of which includes the
entire provinces of Tondo, Bulacan, and Pampanga; Taâl (or Balayàn)
as far as Mindoro and Marinduque; all the coast of Zambales, as far as
the district and bay of Bolinao; Laguna de Bay and its mountains, as
far as and including Mahayhay; the jurisdictions of Cavite, Marivelez,
and the city of Manila. At the present time the see is vacant by the
death of his very illustrious and reverend Lordship, the master Don
Fray Juan Angel Rodriguez, of the Order of the Most Holy Trinity
for the Redemption of Captives; and it enjoys as a yearly stipend
5,000 pesos of common gold, in virtue of the decree by his Majesty
dated at Madrid on May 28, 1680. The said holy church has a dean,
with 600 pesos as annual stipend in virtue of another royal decree
of his Majesty; four dignitaries--archdeacon, schoolmaster, cantor,
and treasurer--with 500 pesos each a year, which amounts to the sum
of 2,000 pesos; three canons (which include a doctoral, a magistral,
and an honorary prebend), with 400 pesos each as yearly stipend,
amounting to 1,200 pesos; two racioneros, with 300 pesos each as
annual stipend, amounting to 600 pesos; two medio-racioneros, each
receiving 200 pesos a year, which make 400 pesos; and a master of
ceremonies--a post recently established by a royal decree dated at El
Pardo on February 22, 1734, with 200 pesos of yearly stipend. The said
holy church has also a grant for its fabrica, material and spiritual,
[15] of 600 ducados of silver, which make 825 pesos. [Of this sum]
500 ducados are for the pay of the verger, the musicians, and others
who serve it; and the remaining 100 ducados are for the fabrica [i.e.,
the care of the building]. It has also 400 pesos of offerings each
year--by another royal decree of April 12, 1734--for the purchase of
Castilian wine, with which is celebrated the holy sacrifice of the
mass; olive-oil and balsam for the holy oils; and cocoanut-oil for
the lamp which burns before the blessed sacrament.



The holy church of Zebu

It has its bishop, and its jurisdiction extends to that entire
province, and comprises that of Leyte with its adjoining islands;
the province of Caraga; Panay, and the jurisdiction of Ogton and
its islands, as far as Calamyanes; Paragua, and the northern coast
of Mindanao, extending even to the Marianas Islands. At the present
time this church is governed by his very illustrious Lordship, Don
Protaçio Cavezas, who is bishop-elect; and he enjoys an annual stipend
of 4,000 pesos, by virtue of the royal decree already cited of May 28,
1680. For the fabrica, material and spiritual, of the said holy church
is assigned an encomienda of 1,783 1/2 tributes by royal decree of
October 28, 1670; these are collected on the account of his Majesty,
and their value (which is 2,000 pesos, after deducting all expenses)
is paid from this royal treasury to that prelate annually for the
maintenance of chaplains, the purchase of wax, oil, and wine, the pay
of singers and sacristans, and other expenses necessary to worship
in the said holy church.



Holy church of Nueva Cazeres

It has a bishop, and its jurisdiction embraces the entire provinces
of Camarines and Albay, as far as and including the islands of
Ticao, Masbate, Burias, and Catanduanes; the province of Tayabas,
as far as and including Luchan; and in the opposite coast of Maobàn,
to Binangonan, Polo, Baler, and Casiguran. At present it is governed
by his very illustrious Lordship Doctor Don Ysidoro de Arevalo, who
is the bishop-elect; and he enjoys a yearly stipend of 4,000 pesos
of common gold, conformably to the aforesaid royal decree. Likewise
a payment is made from the royal treasury, in virtue of a decree by
the supreme government and the council of the royal treasury dated
October 2, 1723, 200 pesos, for priests of the choir, at 100 pesos
each, as assistants of the aforesaid illustrious lord. Another payment
is made of 400 pesos, assigned to this church by the royal decree,
dated at San Yldefonso on August 19, 1736, for the pay of singers,
sacristans, and doorkeepers, and other expenses for worship and for the
[care of the] building of the aforesaid holy church. It likewise has
a contribution of 232 pesos, 4 tomins, which is paid in 6 quintals
of wax, 100 gantas of cocoanut-oil, and 4 arrobas of Castilian wine,
in conformity with another royal decree dated February 21, 1705.



The holy church of Nueva Segovia

It has a bishop (whose title is of Cagayan), and its jurisdiction
comprises the province of Pangasinan from the promontory of Bolinao,
and that of Ylocos; and Cagayan, as far as and including Palauan on
the opposite coast. At this time the see is vacant by the death of
his illustrious Lordship Doctor Don Geronimo de Herrera y Lopez, and
this said bishopric enjoys an annual stipend of 4,000 pesos of common
gold, in virtue of the royal decree cited. It has two priests in the
choir, to whom 200 pesos are paid yearly for their support, each 100
pesos, in virtue of a decree of the general council of the treasury
and of the supreme government, dated December 23, 1723. It enjoys a
contribution of 232 pesos, 4 tomins, which is paid to it in 6 quintals
of wax, 100 gantas of cocoanut-oil, and 4 arrobas of Castilian wine,
in conformity with the royal decree of February 21, 1675.

General summary of the amounts of the stipends, funds for current
expenses [fabricas], and contributions belonging to the four
cathedrals.


Cathedrals             Stipends  Expense  Contributions   Totals
                                 funds

Metropolitan, Manila  10,000 p.    825 p.  400 p.        11,225 p.
Cathedral, Zebu        4,000 p.  2,000 p.                 6,000 p.
Id. N. Caceres         4,200 p.    400 p.  232 p., 4t.    4,832 p., 4t.
Id. N. Segovia         4,200 p.            232 p., 4t.    4,432 p., 4t.
                      --------   -------   ----------    -------------
    Totals            22,400 p.  3,225 p.  865 p.        26,490 p.





CONVENTS, COLLEGES, HOSPITALS AND HOUSES WHICH ENJOY STIPENDS AND
CONTRIBUTIONS FROM THE ROYAL TREASURY, AND HAVE NO ADMINISTRATION
[OF PARISHES]

Within the walls of this city there is a royal chapel with six
chaplains, who render service in the functions of the royal Audiencia;
and it was especially instituted for the [spiritual] direction and
assistance of the soldiers who serve in this royal army. Its expenses
are met from the payments and wages which are issued monthly from the
royal treasury, deducting from each of these a certain amount called
"the contribution" for the said royal chapel, which amounts during the
year to 6,004 pesos, 1 tomin. From this sum are paid annually 3,020
pesos for the salaries of chaplains and the expenses of divine worship;
and the remainder is held in the said royal treasury, in order with
it to provide for repairs on the aforesaid chapel, the renewal of the
ornaments, and other extraordinary expenses--on account of which it
is not brought into the computation with the other allotments.

There is a royal hospital £or the soldiers of the regiment, with
two chaplains, a steward, a physician, a surgeon, and an apothecary,
all salaried; and it is provided with everything necessary for the
comfort and treatment of the sick. The proceeds of its endowment
annually amount to the sum--which is paid to it in money, including
the value of 8,400 fowls--of 7,891 pesos; 960 cavans of rice, 3
arrobas of Castilian wine, and 384 gantas of cocoanut-oil.

The royal college and seminary of San Phelipe was founded and erected
by royal decrees of April 8, 1702, and December 21, 1712. It has
a teacher of grammar, and eight seminarists who serve in this holy
cathedral church in all its offices and functions as a class; their
maintenance amounts annually to 1,520 pesos in money, including other
supplies which are delivered from the storehouses--360 cavans of rice,
one arroba of wine, and 192 gantas of cocoanut-oil.

The seminary of Santa Potenciana was founded in the year 1591, when
Gomez Perez Dasmariñas was governor of these islands, and was received
under the royal patronage. It has twenty-four inmates, daughters of
Spanish fathers, with their chaplain, superior, doorkeeper, and other
servants, all paid on the account of his Majesty; their salaries and
maintenance amount each year to 2,476 pesos in money. They receive
also 504 cavans of rice, two arrobas of wine, and 168 gantas of
cocoanut-oil; in this is also included the cost of the clothing for
the students and servants, that of divine worship, and other lesser
expenses. And for this it enjoys an encomienda, by an act of the royal
Audiencia dated February 4, 1668, the income of which is collected
for the treasury, and its management and administration is placed in
charge of the royal official accountant.

There are two royal chairs of canons and institutes, one in the
college of San Ygnacio of the Society of Jesus, and the other in
the college of Santo Thomas, of the Order of St. Dominic; these were
recently established, by royal decree of October 23, 1733, with two
professors at salaries of 400 pesos each, which make 800 pesos a year.

The brotherhood of the holy Misericordia, and the seminary of Santa
Ysabel for girls, in which a great number of them are sheltered; these
are administered by a purveyor and twelve deputies, who are appointed
yearly. They take charge of the incomes and charitable funds assigned
to the said house, from which is produced a sufficient amount for
the support of the establishment, for dowries, and for other large
charitable contributions, which they distribute in accordance with
the Constitutions of the brotherhood. This house is at present under
the immediate protection of his Majesty, by his royal decree of March
25, 1733; and it enjoys on the account of the royal treasury only
an encomienda of 963 tributes, by a royal grant of October 24, 1667,
the net value of which will be set down in the proper place.

The calced Augustinians have a convent of San Pablo with an adequate
number of religious, who are annually assisted by this treasury with
a contribution of wine for celebrating the holy sacrifice of mass,
and oil for the lamp which burns before the blessed sacrament, in
accordance with the late royal order of his Majesty, dated September
15, 1726--at the rate of one arroba of wine for each priest, and 75
gantas of cocoanut-oil for each lamp.

The convent of San Gregorio, of discalced Franciscan religious, is
likewise assisted by the contribution of wine and oil, in accordance
with the aforesaid royal order.

The monastery of the nuns of Santa Clara is likewise assisted with
a contribution of wine and oil, in virtue of the said royal decree;
and besides this it enjoys an encomienda, by decree of April 4,
1664, the income of which is collected on the account of his Majesty,
and its net amount, which is paid from the treasury, is 583 pesos.

The convent of the religious of St. Dominic, with two colleges (named
Santo Tomas, and San Juan de Letran), enjoys the same contribution of
wine and oil, in accordance with the aforesaid royal decree. It has
likewise 400 pesos in money, and 800 cavans of rice, for the stipend of
four priests in active service, who must reside in the said convent in
virtue of a royal decree dated July 23, 1639; and the said college of
San Juan de Letran enjoys an encomienda of 700 tributes by royal grant
of January 10, 1734, the value of which will be entered in its class.

The college of San Ygnacio, of the fathers of the Society of Jesus,
and that of San Joseph, composed of students, are likewise aided
with a contribution of wine and oil, in accordance with the aforesaid
royal decree. They likewise receive 400 pesos, and 800 cavans of rice,
for the stipends of four priests in active service who must reside in
the said college of San Ygnacio, in accordance with the royal decree
dated February 18, 1707. And the said college of San Joseph enjoys an
encomienda of 383 1/2 tributes, on account of 20,000 pesos which were
granted to it by royal decree of his Majesty dated October 5, 1703, the
net value of which will be entered in the class to which it belongs.

The convent of San Nicolas of the Recollect religious of St. Augustine
similarly enjoys its contribution of wine and oil, in accordance with
the said recent royal decree of his Majesty.

The convent of San Juan de Dios is also assisted with the contribution
of wine and oil in virtue of the said royal decree, and 50 pesos in
medicines; it also enjoys an encomienda of 541 1/2 tributes, by royal
grant of July 2, 1735, the net value of which will be entered in the
class to which it belongs.

Within the walls [of the city] are also contained two beaterios--one
of Dominican nuns, called Santa Catharina, with sufficient incomes;
and another connected with the Society of Jesus, containing poor
Indian women, who are maintained by charity and do not enjoy any
allotment on the account of his Majesty.

Outside the walls of this city is the hospital of San Lazaro, in charge
of discalced religious of St. Francis, for contagious diseases. This
is annually assisted from this royal treasury, in accordance with the
royal decree of January 22, 1672, with 787 pesos, 4 tomins in money,
including the cost of 1,500 laying hens, 200 blankets, and 1,500
cavans of rice; and one arroba of wine for the celebration of the
holy sacrifice of mass.

The church of Los Santos Reyes of the Parian, and the hospital of San
Gabriel for the Christian Sangleys, and for medical treatment of them
and of the infidels, in charge of the religious of St. Dominic, receive
from the communal treasury of the Sangleys themselves 2,400 pesos;
and from the royal treasury only the contribution of five arrobas
of wine for the aforesaid celebration of the holy sacrifice of mass,
and one hundred and fifty gantas of cocoanut-oil for the lamps which
burn before the depository of the Divine One.

The sanctuary of our Lady of Safety and convent of San Juan Bauptista,
of the discalced religious of St. Augustine, situated in Bagumbayan,
enjoys only the aforesaid contribution of wine and oil.

To the infirmary which the religious Order of St. Dominic has, for
the medical treatment of its religious, is paid every year 100 pesos
as a contribution, in accordance with the royal order of his Majesty,
dated September 4, 1667.

To the three infirmaries of the Order of St. Francis is paid every
year a contribution of 329 pesos, for the treatment of its sick
religious who are in this city and in the provinces of Laguna de Bay
and Camarines, in virtue of his Majesty's decree of October 30, 1600.

At the distance of one legua, or a little less, there are two houses
or sanctuaries--one named San Francisco del Monte, with two chapels
close by, where regularly serve one religious (a priest of the Order
of St. Francis), and one lay-brother, or donado of the reformed branch,
which is called "the house of retreat or penance;" the other is called
San Juan del Monte, with a religious of the Order of St. Dominic--and
these enjoy only the contribution of wine.

The sanctuary of our Lady of Guadalupe, of calced Augustinian
religious, enjoys the same contribution of wine and oil.

In the port of Cavite there is a convent of religious of St. Dominic,
and another of Recollect religious; a college of the fathers of
the Society of Jesus; and a hospice of the Order of St. John of
God--all without [parochial] administration; and they enjoy only the
contribution of wine and oil.

Likewise in the city of Zebu there is a convent of calced Augustinians
with three religious, priests; another convent of discalced
Augustinians, with one priest; and a college of the Society of Jesus,
with two priests. In the port of Yloylo, in the province of Ogton,
the Society have another college with one priest. The religious of
St. Dominic have a convent with two priests in the city of Nueva
Segovia, in the province of Cagayan. All these houses are without
administration, and enjoy only the same contribution of wine and oil.



Summary of the amounts of the stipends and contributions from the
royal treasury which are enjoyed by the convents, colleges, hospitals,
and houses which have no [parochial] administration.


Convents, colleges, hospitals,     Cash,       Rice,    Wine,     Oil,
and houses                         pesos       cavans   arrobas   gantas

Royal military chapel
Royal hospital                     7,891         960         3      384
Royal college of San Phelipe       1,520         360         1      192
Royal seminary Sta. Potenciana     2,466         504         2      168
  Chairs of canon law and
  institutes                         800
Brotherhood of Misericordia
Convent of S. Pablo (cal. Aug.)                             25       75
Conv. S. Gregorio (disc. Fran.)                             18       75
Monastery of Sta. Clara              583                     2       75
Conv. St. Dominic, and two
  colleges                           400         800        23      225
Coll. S. Ygnacio and S. Joseph       400         800        20      150
Conv. S. Nicolas (Recollect)                                24       75
Conv. San Juan de Dios                50                     2       75
Two beaterios (Domin. nuns and
  Indian women)
Hospital of San Lazaro               787 [16]  1,500         1
Church of Parian and hospital of
  San Gabriel                                                5      150
Sanctuary Our Lady of Safety                                 6       75
Infirmary for relig. of St.
  Dominic                            100
Three infirmaries of St. Francis     329
Two sanctuaries, S. Juan and S.
Francisco de los Montes                                      2
Sanct. of Our Lady of Guadalupe                              2
Two conv., one coll., and one
  hospital at port Cavite                                   12      225
Three conv., and two coll. in
  the provinces                                             10      375
                                  ------       -----       ---    -----
    Totals                        15,326       4,924       158    2,319




ENCOMIENDAS OF INDIANS; HOW THEY WERE GRANTED, AND THE OWNERS WHO
POSSESS THEM

In accordance with royal decrees of donation, his Majesty has assigned
encomiendas in these islands to the extent of 18,041 1/4 tributes. Of
these, 8,784 1/4 are assigned to four religious communities and
eleven private persons, and their net product is collected by the
encomenderos themselves or by their agents; and the remaining 9,257 are
collected by the royal officials of these islands for the subventions
and contributions which are stated in the aforesaid grants. They are
separately mentioned in the following form:




Encomiendas belonging to religious communities and to private persons


[Grantees]                       Date of grant     No. of       Value in      Net
                                                   tributes     cash,         receipts,

                                                                  p. t. gr.     p. t. gr.

College of Sta. Ysabel, this
city                             Oct. 24, 1671       963        1,328  2  6   1,030  3  7
College of San Joseph, on
  account of 20,000 pesos        Oct. 5, 1703        383 1/2      671  1        485  2 10
College of S. Juan de Letran     Jan. 10, 1734       700          963  2  6     718  7  6
Hospital of S. Juan de Dios      July 2, 1735        541 1/2      812  2        584  1
D. Pedro de Garaycoechea (2nd
  life)                          Oct. 30, 1690     1,247        1,558  6        960  0  4
D. Fernando Hidalgo (2nd life)   Sept. 31 [sic; 21
                                 or 30?], 1701       383          536  1  9     386  7  8
D. Juan Francisco de Salinas
  (2nd life)                     June 21, 1705       419 1/2      540  2  2     380  2  8
D. Balthazar de Soto (2nd
  life)                          June 11, 1709       350 3/4      364  6  2     239  2  3
D. Antonio Gomez Quixedo [17]
  (2nd life)                     July 15, 1711       640          880           540  3  6
Da. Josepha de Erquiñigo,
  Condeza de Pineda, two
  encomiendas                    Dec. 19, 1712     1,323        1,659  2      1,036  6  2
D. Juan Afan de Rivera (2nd
  life)                          March 6, 1715       387 1/2      406  6        271  5
D. Julian Fernandez de Guevara
  (2nd life)                     June 30, 1721       470          517  4  5     342  0  3
Da. Monica de Yturralde (2nd
  life)                          July 30, 1721       233 1/2      256  6  9     170  0 11
D. Nicolas Cortez Monrroy (2nd
  life)                          July 30, 1721       379          568  4        397  5  2
Da. Maria Manuela Rita Manzano
  (2nd life), two encomiendas    July 14, 1738       363          425  5        273  3  3
                                                   ---------   ------------   -----------
    Totals                                         8,784 1/4   11,489  4  3   7,817  4  1



Encomiendas in which the collections are made on his Majesty's account,
to be applied to the objects for which they were granted.


[Grantees]                       Date of grant     No. of       Value in      Net
                                                   tributes     cash,         receipts,

                                                                  p. t. gr.     p.  t.  gr.
The monastery of So. Clara
  enjoys, by decree of           Apr. 4, 1664        868          971  6 10     583  0  6
The seminary of Santa
  Potenciana enjoys for its
  maintenance, by act of the
  royal Audiencia,               Feb. 4, 1668      1,437 1/2    2,078  5  4   1,492  5  5
For the pay of the lieutenant-
  general of the artillery, he
  possesses, by decree of        Dec. 16, 1608       895 1/2    1,044  1        692  7  8
To pay for the wine for masses
  and oil for the lamps, there
  are, by decree of              Apr. 8, 1668      4,272 1/2    5,913  2  6   4,760  6  9
For the maintenance of the
  building of the holy cathedral
  church of Zebu, it enjoys, by
  decree of                      Oct. 28. 1670     1,783 1/2    2,690  3  1   2,000
                                                   ---------   ------------   -----------
    Totals                                         9,257       12,698  2  9   9,529  4  4


These encomiendas, although they were granted for the maintenance and
existence of the five objects here stated, have had the tributes
collected on the account of his Majesty with the aggregate of
the other tributes united to the royal crown [the aforesaid sums]
being paid by the royal treasury to the parties concerned, not only
the net amount of what is due to each, but what is necessary for
the existence of those for whom they are destined, obtaining from
other sources indifferently whatever is lacking to make up that
sum. The amount of each is entered in the corresponding summaries
[of accounts] as a charge upon the general fund of the treasury,
according to what the parties receive--not only in cash, but in other
assets from the royal storehouses--in order to establish, with the
distinction and clearness which this memorandum permits, the total
with which his Majesty piously contributes to the preservation of
the ecclesiastical estate in these islands. It is brought in here,
in the account of the encomiendas, only to show how it is applied,
and not as an increased charge on the royal treasury.



ACTIVE MISSIONS

There are at present thirty-nine apostolic missionaries, distributed
among twenty-one active missions which are situated in various places
and provinces, who are engaged in the conversion and settlement of
the infidels who dwell in the mountains in the greater number of
these islands. Of these, one is a secular ecclesiastic; four belong
to the calced Augustinian religious; five are discalced Franciscans;
twenty are Dominicans; two belong to the Society of Jesus, and seven
to the Augustinian Recollects. Aid is given to them on the account
of his Majesty, in accordance with his royal decrees, by the stipend
of 100 pesos and 100 fanegas of rice to each missionary, and with the
military escorts necessary to their protection and to the safety of the
subdued Indians. Likewise they receive a monthly allowance for these
men, of one peso and one cavan of rice [for each], to which is added
the cost of transporting this provision to the places where they are,
which sometimes amounts to as much as the value of the principal. The
mission which now is especially considered to have made the greatest
progress and advancement is that established in the mountains of Ytuy
and Paniqui in the province of Cagayàn, in charge of the religious
of the Order of St. Dominic--who, penetrating into the country,
a task which had previously been greatly facilitated by the calced
religious of the Order of St. Augustine, have brought that province
into communication with the others in this great island (something
which formerly could not be done, except by sea), with great harvest
of souls who have been converted to our holy Catholic faith. These
costs are stated in the following summary, that which belongs to each
mission being given separately.



Summary of the expenses which the active missions which are mentioned
occasion to the royal exchequer.


Provinces     Missionary ministers                            Cash,      Rice,   Wine,    Oil,
                                                              pesos tom. cavans  arrobas  gantas

---- [18]      2 missionaries of the Society of Jesus, with     331         472
                   escorts and transportation
Pampanga       4 mission., calced Augustinians, with escorts    960       1,088
                   and transportation
Idem           4 Dominicans, with escorts and transportation    820       1,016
Idem           2 Augustinian Recollects, with escorts and
                   transportation                               480         544      2   150
Pangasinan     3 Dominicans, with escorts and transportation    537         744
Idem           2 Augustinian Recollects, with escorts and
                   transportation                               412         544
Ylocos         1 missionary, a secular ecclesiastic             100         200      1    75
Cagayàn       13 Dominicans, with their escorts and
                   transportation                             4,030  4    4,352
Laguna de Bay  1 Franciscan, with escort and transportation     189         272
Tayabas        2 Franciscans, with their escorts and
                   transportation                               616
Mindoro        1 Augustinian Recollect                          151  5      200           75
Camarines      2 Franciscans, with their escorts and
                   transportation                               412         544
Zebu           2 Augustinian Recollects                         200         400
                                                              --------   ------      -   ---
10 provinces  39 missionaries, in 2 missions                  9,239  1   10,376      3   300
                                                              p. t. [19] cavans  arrob.  gantas





Ministers, and villages of converted Indians; the stipends and
offerings which they enjoy on this account, according to the number
of tributes to whom they minister.

All the Indian neophytes--settled in four hundred and fifteen villages
and fifty-three visitas, which compose the twenty-one provinces of
the territory--have their ministers of religious instruction, who
exercise toward them the office of parish priests. These ministers
are aided on his Majesty's account, in accordance with the regulation
made by the adelantado Miguel Lopez de Legazpi while he was governor
of these islands, which was approved by royal decree of April 24,
1584. They received a hundred pesos and a hundred fanegas of rice
for every five hundred tributes to whom they minister, and the
contribution of wine and oil which was ordained by the late royal
decree dated September 15 in the year 1726--enjoying this without any
limitation of time. The separate provinces and number of ministers,
and the amount of expenses, will be shown in the following tables:



Summary of the stipends which each religious order is entitled to
receive for the mission villages and ministries that it has.


Provinces        Curates, sacristans, and         Cash          Rice,       Wine,    Oil,
                 chaplains                         p. t. gr.    cav. gant.  arrobas  gantas

Manila           2 curas, with their sacristans   551  3  6                  2        150
Tondo            3 curas, with 3 sacristans       743  2 11       200        3        225
Cavité           2 curas, and 2 sacristans        517  5          200        2        150
Mindoro          1 cura and 1 sacristan           223  3 11                  1         75
Laguna de Bay    3 curas                          396  1  9        57   4    3        225
Balayàn          2 curas                          327  3  2       654  19    2        150
Cagayàn          1 cura and 1 sacristan           358  0  1       164  14    1         75
Idem             1 chaplain for the fort          180
Ylocos           2 curas and 1 sacristan          770  7  3     1,358        2        150
Camarines        6 curas and 1 sacristan        1,022  7  4       694   9    6        450
Tayabas          3 curas                          253  4          307        3        225
Albay            10 curas                       1,173           2,346       10        750
Zebu             1 cura and 1 sacristan           275  5  9                  1         75
Idem             3 curas                          766  4  2       797  19    3        225
Ogton            2 curas and 1 sacristan          458  1          364  19    2        150
Panay            3 curas                          517  7  2     1,035  19    3        225
I. de Negros     4 curas                          723  2  4     1,446  14    4        300
Leyte            1 cura                            79             138        1         75

In 16 provinces  49 curas, 13 sacristans,       -----------     ---------   --      -----
                 and 1 chaplain                 9,338  3  4     9,764  21   49      3,675
                                                   p. t. gr.    cav. gant.  arrobas  gantas


Provinces        Ministries      Cash           Rice,        Wine,    Oil,
                                    p. t. gr.   cav. gant.   arrobas  gantas

Tondo            2 ministries      391  0  9      782  4      4         150
Pampanga         5     ,,          220  6  4      441 14      9         375
Cagayan          20    ,,        1,517  0  9    3,034  4     33       1,500
Pangasinan       15    ,,        2,534  1  7    5,068  8     26       1,125
                                 -----------    --------     --       -----
In 4 provinces,  42 ministries   4,663  1  5    9,326  6     72       6,150
                                    p. t. gr.   cav. gant.   arrobas  gantas


Provinces        Ministries      Cash           Rice,        Wine,    Oil,
                                    p. t. gr.   cav. gant.   arrobas  gantas

Tondo            4 ministries      416  7  2      833 19      9         300
Bulacan          4     ,,          611  0  9    1,222  4      5         300
Bay              24    ,,        1,492  1  7    2,984  9     28       1,800
Cagayàn          1     ,,           44  3  2       88 19      1          75
Camarines        18    ,,        1,883  0  9    3,766  4     20       1,350
Tayabas          11    ,,        1,312  6  4                 17         825
                                 -----------    --------     --       -----
In 6 provinces,  62 ministries   5,760  3  9    8,895  7     80       4,650
                                    p. t. gr.   cav. gant.   arrobas  gantas


Provinces        Ministries      Cash           Rice,        Wine,    Oil,
                                    p. t. gr.   cav. gant.   arrobas  gantas

Tondo            6 ministries    1,224  4  9    2.449  4      15        450
Bulacan          9     ,,        1,077  4       2,155         13        675
Pampanga         18    ,,        1,416  4  9    2,833  4      30      1,350
Pangasinan       3     ,,          368  4         737          4        225
Ylocos           19    ,,        2,843          5,686         25      1,425
Balayàn          6     ,,          933  1  7    1,866  9      10        450
Zebu             3     ,,          441  7  3      516  4       4        225
Ogton            14    ,,        2,164  7  2    4,329 19      21      1,050
Panay            10    ,,        1,098  2  4    2,196 14      11        750
Bay              1     ,,          122  0  9      244  4       1         75
                                ------------   ---------     ---      -----
In 10 provinces, 89 ministries  11,690  4  7   23,013 10     134      6,675
                                    p. t. gr.  cav. gant.    arrobas  gantas


Provinces        Ministries and chaplains       Cash           Rice,        Wine,    Oil,
                                                   p. t. gr.   cav. gant.   arrobas  gantas

Tondo            9 ministries                     710  2  4     1,420 14     16        675
Cavite           4     ,,                         546  4  9     1,093  4      6        300
Mariveles        1     ,,                          62  4  8       125  4      2         75
Mindoro          3     ,,                         212  4          425         3        225
Zebu             15    ,,                       1,661  7  2     3,323 19     17      1,125
Ogton            1     ,,                         112  4          225         1         75
Idem             1 chaplain for the fort          180
I. de Negros     3 ministries                     238             476         3        225
Leyte            32    ,,                       3,433  0  9     6,866  4     32      2,400
Samboanga        3     ,,                         300             600         3        225
[Idem]           and for their transportation      75
                                                -----------    ---------     --      -----
In 9 provinces   71 ministries and 1 chaplain   7,532  3  8    14,554 21     83      5,325
                                                   p. t. gr.   cav. gant.   arrobas  gantas


Provinces        Ministries and chaplains       Cash           Rice,        Wine,    Oil,
                                                   p. t. gr.   cav. gant.   arrobas  gantas

Tondo            1 ministry                         17            34           3        75
Mariveles        2     ,,                          226                         3       150
Mindoro          4     ,,                          315  6  4     631 14        7       300
Pangasinan       4     ,,                          265  5  7     531  9       10       300
Albay            2     ,,                          156  3  2     312 19        4       150
Zebu             2     ,,                          171  6  4     343 14        6       150
Panay            2     ,,                          210           420           4       150
Caraga           7     ,,                          606  7  2   1,213 19       11       525
Idem             1 chaplain for the fort           180
Calamianes       4 ministries                      398  4  9     797  4        7       300
Idem             1 chaplain for the fort           180
                                                 -----------   --------       --     -----
In 9 provinces   28 ministries and 2 chaplains   2,728  1  4   4,284  7       55     2,100
                                                   p. t. gr.   cav. gant.   arrobas  gantas



In order better to understand these tables, no estimate is made, in
the class of secular ecclesiastics, of the additional sums which many
of them enjoy from the treasury besides the amounts from the tributes
to which they minister, for the amount required for their subsistence,
in accordance with the royal decrees and acts of the treasury council
obtained at the beginning of their establishment; and this surplus
causes the disparity which cannot fail to be noticed. In the province
of Tayabas, which is administered by the religious of St. Francis,
there is no charge for rice, since this is always included in the
amount of cash [supplied from the treasury]--as was agreed between
this order, the governor, and the royal officials, on account of
the scarcity [of supplies] in that province, and the difficulties
which are found in the remittance, transportation, and delivery of
that commodity.

It is also set forth that, after the budget for the provinces was drawn
up, and the number of tributes in them realized, it was resolved in a
conference of the royal treasury officials to abolish the register of
strolling Indians, reducing them to a poll-list like the rest of the
tribute-payers. According to these latest enumerations the amounts
of the stipends are settled, and not in accordance with those which
were considered in the aforesaid budget--from which fact arises the
difference which is found in this one.


Summary of the amounts of stipends and contributions

Ministries                                   Cash           Rice,       Wine,    Oil,
                                                p.  t. gr.  cav. gant.  arrobas  gantas

49 curates, 13 sacristans, and 1 chaplain
   --[seculars]                               9,338  3  4    9,764 21     49      3,675
42 ministers, religious of St. Dominic        4,663  1  5    9,326  6     72      3,150
62 ministers, discalced religious of St.
   Francis                                    5,760  3  9    8,895  7     80      4,650
89 ministers, calced Augustinian religious   11,690  4  7   23,013 10    134      6,675
71 ministers and 1 chaplain of the Society
   of Jesus                                   7,532  3  8   14,554 21     83      5,325
28 ministers and 2 chaplains of the
   discalced Augustinians                     2,728  1  4    4,284  7     55      2,100
                                             ------------   ---------    ---     ------
    Totals                                   41,713  2  1   69,839       473     25,575
                                                p.  t. gr.  cav. gant.  arrobas  gantas


General summary of the amounts, in stipends, contributions, and grants,
with which the ecclesiastical estate in these islands is aided on
his Majesty's account.


Ministries                                  Cash           Rice,       Wine,    Oil,
                                               p.  t. gr.  cav. gant.  arrobas  gantas

Four cathedral churches                    26,490
Colleges, hospitals, and other houses
    without administration                 15,326  4        4,924      158       2,319
Grants of encomiendas, and their net
    product                                 7,817  4  1
Encomiendas in which collections are
    made by the royal treasury
Active missions, summary                    9,239  1  4    10,376        3         300
Stipends of ministers in charge of
    doctrinas                              41,713  2  1    69,839      473      25,575
                                          -------------    ------      ---      ------
Totals                                    100,586  3  6    85,139      634      28,194
                                                p. t. gr.  cav. gant.  arrobas  gantas


This is, in brief, what his Catholic Majesty piously expends
and distributes every year from his royal exchequer in aiding the
ecclesiastical estate and the divine worship in these islands, not only
in money but in rice, wine, and oil--in everything conforming to the
royal decrees and other provisions, on which is based the certified
statement furnished by the royal officials to this government. And,
in order that the total amount from both [these kinds of aid] may be
better understood, I have thought it best to proceed to the reduction
of commodities [to a cash basis], by which may be exhibited the actual
cash value [of all that is given for this purpose].




Reduction of commodities for the computation of the whole in cash


[Class of aid]              Commodities        Rates of cost        Cash value,
                            furnished                                    p. t. gr.

Actual cash                                                         100,586  3  6
Rice (24 gantas in a cavan)   85,139 cavans     4 tomins a cavan     42,569  4
Wine for masses (arrobas)        634 arrobas   25 pesos an arroba    15,850
Oil for the lamps (gantas)    28,194 gantas     1 tomin a ganta       3,524  2

                                                 Sum total 162,530 p., 1 t., 6 gr.


Consequently, the payments in kind being reduced to money at the
prices which are indicated, according to the estimate made every five
years--in which are considered the transportation expenses, items
of waste, and cost of administration--the whole amounts to 162,530
pesos, 1 tomin, and 6 granos, according to the computation. This
amount is annually requisitioned by the royal officials from the
amount of the tributes and other branches of income indifferently,
in such a manner that when the Indians fail--either in order to keep
a reserve, or for some other special reason of scarcity--to pay the
portion of rice which is required from them, it is necessary to make
extraordinary purchases on his Majesty's account, at the prices which
at the time are current, in order to furnish the ecclesiastical estate
with a suitable amount for their stipend. It is also necessary that
the aid for each individual ecclesiastic be delivered, at the cost of
the royal treasury, in his respective place of ministry, from which
follows an increased and extraordinary expense in the transportation
of these succors.

As regards the wine for masses, the royal officials of this treasury
usually ask those of Mexico to send in each ship 500 arrobas of
wine, which, it is estimated, ought to be distributed among the
communities and ministries of the religious--considering that the
secular ecclesiastics are accustomed to receive this in money,
at the same rate of twenty-five pesos [an arroba]. The officials
of Mexico punctually fill this order, deducting from the situado
the cost of purchasing the wine and transporting it to the port of
Acapulco--so that, when delivered in this city, and allowance being
made for the waste, the total cost never falls below twenty-five
pesos [an arroba]. As the aforesaid waste is usually considerable,
on account of the long navigation and carrying the wine in [mule-]
loads by land--and from the amount thus sent is separated, in the
first place, the wine necessary for the use of the royal chapel and
of the chaplains of the royal Audiencia, [and for the celebration of
mass in] the forts of Santiago and San Phelipe, at the timber-cutting
[by the Indians], and in the ships of his Majesty--there is seldom
enough wine to furnish the entire arroba which belongs to each
priest. For this reason the net amount of what remains is divided
pro rata among the aforesaid communities and ministries of religious,
without keeping back the third part (as formerly was the custom) for
emergency cases, on account of the urgent representations made on this
point by the general procurators of the aforesaid communities--giving
as their reason that this reserve would be safer and better guarded in
their hands than in the royal storehouses, and there would be reason
to fear that the wine would be consumed or adulterated. The matter
having been considered at a session of the royal treasury officials
on December 5, 1738, it was decided that the royal officials should
proceed to deliver the wine, obliging the parties concerned to provide
for themselves whatever lack might occur in the future, to which all
agreed; in virtue of this, from that time was delivered to them all
that was their share in the pro rata division of the net amount of
all the wine that was on hand for this purpose.

As for the cocoanut-oil for the lamps, there is seldom any change in
the amount paid to the churches; for it is the current practice, in
all the provinces where that tree grows, that the Indians contribute it
on account of the tribute, at the fixed price of one real for a ganta,
and at the same price when it must be purchased, which the natives call
"bandala." If there is any excess of cost, it is in the fact that oil
is bought on urgent occasions in this city for the careening of the
vessels and other special needs of the royal service--for which as
regards the contributions [to the churches], only so much is levied
[from the Indians] as accords with the amount agreed on [with them].

Besides this enormous amount of stipends and offerings with which his
Majesty aids the ecclesiastical estate, the ministers in charge of
the villages of Indian converts have generally introduced the annual
collection, from the parishioners under their administration, of three
reals from each whole tribute (that is, a man and wife) and from an
unmarried man half that amount, as an offering, for the feasts of the
titular saint of the village, the monument, and All Saints' day; this
also realizes a considerable sum for them, which may be more clearly
understood by the statement which is presented in the following table:




Summary of what the ministers who are in charge of the Indian villages
receive from their parishioners, as an offering, for the three feast
days of each village.


[Class]                      Ministers   Villages    Tributes     Offerings,
                                                                  p. t. gr.

Secular ecclesiastics               49         86    32,254       12,095  2
Religious of St. Dominic            42         42    23,316 1/2    8,743  5  6
Religious of St. Francis            62         66    25,520        9,570
Calced religious of St.Augustine    89         93    56,923       21,346  1
Society of Jesus                    71         90    35,524 1/2   13,321  5  6
Discalced Augustinians              28         38    11,276 1/2    4,228  5  6
                                   ---        ---   -----------   ------------
Totals                             341        415   184,814 1/2   69,305  3  6


Consequently the 341 ministers in charge who administer the 415
villages and 53 visitas, and in them the number of 184,814 1/2 tributes
of native Indians, mestizos, and Christian Sangleys--according to the
latest estimate, in which is included the enumeration of strolling
Indians--receive for the aforesaid offering each year 69,305 pesos,
3 tomins, and 6 granos, according to those figures. It cannot be
learned that for the exaction of this offering they have further
permission or privilege than the custom itself, introduced by those
very ecclesiastics and religious in their respective parishes;
nor in this accountancy is there any other evidence for it than the
extra-judicial information acquired by the alcaldes, the natives, and
the business men of the provinces, who have seen this practice in use
in the manner which is here stated. The amount of this offering added
to the 162,530 pesos, 1 tomin, and 6 granos which those ministers
receive in stipends and contributions on his Majesty's account,
makes the sum of 231,835 pesos, and 5 tomins, which is the amount of
the fixed revenue which they receive. Besides this, they have the
proceeds of the occasional fees from marriages, burials, baptisms,
and other parochial dues, which are collected in all the parishes
that are called curacies and ministries; and no account is rendered
of the value of these, because it has not been possible to calculate
it everywhere for the total computation of the usufruct, but it has
always been considered as a large amount. Notwithstanding all this,
the religious orders have their incomes lessened by transporting
a large number of religious from the kingdoms of Castilla to these
islands, at least every six years. In this way they consume a great
part of their means, since the passage-money which his Majesty grants
them for their transportation is a very limited sum. More than all,
we must not fail to remark that the fine appearance of the churches,
and the care taken for divine worship and education, and the zeal for
souls, which are so conspicuous in the ministries of the religious,
cause more admiration than can be expressed, in places so remote as
these and in a Christian church so recently formed. The point most
worthy of consideration is the subordination and reverence which
these natives maintain toward their religious teachers, permitting
the latter to flog them, impose penances on them, and rebuke them,
when they incur blame in any omissions or faults, without their being
offended at the minister. It may therefore truthfully be affirmed
that it is these ministers who preserve in obedience, vassalage,
and subjection all the neophytes, gathered into settlements--more
being due to the authority and despotic manner in which the fathers
rule them than to the political scheme of the alcaldes who govern
them. This arises, as the Indians themselves admit, from a natural
fear which they conceive for the father's superiority, through a
hidden influence which constrains them to feel thus, without knowing
how, but which we understand--supernatural effects of the lofty
and supreme Providence. This result is greatly aided by the care
which the fathers take in instructing, encouraging, and stimulating
them in labor and cultivation, and the management of their domestic
affairs, in which they are thereby benefited. Would that they might
devote themselves at once to suppressing the variety of languages
which the natives use (which serve only to keep alive the root of
their abuses and idolatries), as is done by the crown of Portugal
in all its conquests--gradually bringing them to the use of the
Castilian language, and endeavoring to secure instruction therein
in all the schools, as is ordained by law xviii, book vi, tit. i
of the Recopilación of these kingdoms, in order that its purpose,
so holy and just, may be attained. But I have not been able to find
a convincing reason for their not putting this law into execution,
although I have made efforts to ascertain if there were any. It may
therefore be inferred that some insuperable and hidden difficulty must
have been encountered on the part of the religious who are ministers
in the doctrinas, which has hindered the useful and desirable progress
of this Christian maxim of policy.



Index of the plans, relations, and descriptions which are contained
in this book

Reason for this work; with letter by Don Joseph Patiño, [20]
stating it.   Folio 1.

Concise description of the city of Manila.   Fol. 3.

Description of the castle of Santiago.   Fol. 9.

Plan and topographical chart of the capital, Manila, and of the castle
of Santiago.   Fol. 11.

Description of Cavite, with all the industries which are contained
therein.   Fol. 13.

Plan of Cavite, and of the castle and Ribera. Fol. 23.

Description of Playahonda, with its plan. Fol. 25.

Description of Fort San Francisco at Cagayàn, with its plan annexed.
Fol. 29.

Description of Fort Santiago at Ytugud, with its plan.   Fol. 23.

Description of the fortification San Joseph at Cabicungan, with
its plan.   Fol. 37.

Delineation of Fort San Pablo at Tuao, with its plan.   Fol. 43.

Description of Fort San Joseph at Capinatan. Fol. 47.

Description of Fort Santa Ysabel at Calamianes, with its plan.
Fol. 51.

Description of the fort of Cuyo.   Fol. 55.

Description of the fort of Linapacan.   Fol. 59.

Description of Fort San Juan Bauptista of Lutaya. Fol. 63.

Description of the fort of Culion.   Fol. 67.

Description of the fort at Capis, capital of the province of Panay,
with its plan annexed.    Fol. 71.

Description of the fortification of Romblon.   Fol. 75.

Description of Fort Nuestra Señora del Rossario at the port of Yloylo,
with its plan.    Fol. 79.

Description of Fort San Pedro at the city of Zebu, with its plan.
Fol. 83.

Description of Fort San Joseph at Cagayàn, [21] with its plan.
Fol. 87.

Description of Fort San Francisco Xavier at Yligan, with its plan.
Fol. 91.

Description of Fort Santiago at Dapitan, with its plan.   Fol. 95.

Description of Fort San Joseph at Tandag, capital of the province of
Caraga, with its plan annexed. Fol. 99.

Description of Fort San Francisco at Cateel, with its plan.   Fol. 103.

Description of Fort San Juan Bauptista at Liñao, with its plan.
Fol. 107.

Description of Fort Nuestra Señora del Pilar at Samboangan.   Fol. 115.

Plan of Samboangan.   Fol. 115.

General résumé of the fortifications, their various constructions,
situations, etc.   Fol. 117.

General résumé of the military supplies. Fol. 118.

General résumé of the military forces, pay of the men, etc.   Fol. 119.

Description of the provinces.   Fol. 120.

Province of Tongdo.   Fol. 120.

Province of Bulacan.   Fol. 122.

Province of Pampanga.   Fol. 124.

Province of Pangasinan.   Fol. 126.

Province of Ylocos.   Fol. 128.

Province of Cagayàn.    Fol. 130.

Province of Laguna de Bay.   Fol. 133.

Province of Balayan.   Fol. 136.

Province of Tayabas.   Fol. 138.

Province of Camarines.    Fol. 140.

Province of Albay.   Fol. 142.

Province of Leyte.   Fol. 145.

Province of Caraga.   Fol. 148.

Province of Zebu.   Fol. 150.

Jurisdiction of Island of Negros.   Fol. 153.

Province of Ogton.   Fol. 154.

Province of Panay.    Fol. 156.

Province of Calamianes.    Fol. 158.

Jurisdiction of Mindoro.    Fol. 160.

Jurisdiction of Marivelez.    Fol. 162.

Jurisdiction of Cavite.   Fol. 163.

Government of Samboangan.    Fol. 164.

General résumé of what is included in the description of the provinces.
Fol. 166.

Notice of the royal treasury of Manila.    Fol. 168.

Résumé of what is produced and expended from the royal treasury
of Manila.   Fol. 169.

Hydrographic and chorographic chart of all the Philipinas Islands.
Fol. 172.

[A similar index is given of the second part, that regarding the
ecclesiastical estate; but we omit this, as all the matter in that part
is presented in the foregoing pages--save the preliminary statement
of the "new reason for this work, with the letter of Don Joseph de
la Quintana, [22] which states it;" and, at the end, "Remarks, and
conclusion of the work."]








THE ORDER OF ST. JOHN OF GOD


[The following account of the work done in the Philippines by this
hospital order is summarized from the history written by Maldonado
de Puga.] [23]





CHAPTERS I-IV


[Chapter i relates "the urgent reasons for the present treatise;
and the necessity for, and usefulness of, our hospital order in
Philipinas." In the last paragraph of the chapter Maldonado says:
"These islands are in need of physicians and surgeons, as well
as of medicines; for excepting the capital Manila and the port of
Cabite--where we have hospitals, and where the few secular persons
who exercise the profession [of medicine] can render assistance--the
rest of the provinces, and the many dependent towns, are supported
by Providence alone, being helped by herbs and other simples about
which they have been instructed by continual use. But, as this is so
complicated a matter, whenever the patient's constitution and the dose
disagree, or when other substances are added to make the latter more
effective, the very article which was regarded as a remedy usually
aggravates the sickness, and consequently there are continual deaths
among those who make mistakes. In this capital, although there are
apothecary shops, and practitioners who write prescriptions--whose
charity is taken for granted, so far as they can exercise it--the
crowd of patients who resort to them does not allow them to succor
all, and it results that there is a great number who are unprovided
[with medical aid]. Others, because their poverty cannot bear the cost
of the medicines, and who have no one from whom to obtain food, find
their only asylum in our hospitals--where, without any hesitation,
all are received; and, making a distinction in the respect paid
to them, in regard to the rank or character of various persons who
have entered these houses, in so far as our abilities extend, the
institution has succeeded in giving entire satisfaction. Although the
royal charity maintains here a hospital and chapel at enormous cost,
it is understood that this is only for officers, soldiers, seamen,
and Pampangos who have positions and render actual service; for the
men retired from service are excluded by this rule, except by special
favor of the superior government. On this account, our attention to
our duties brings us in contact with a variety of people--priests,
citizens, militiamen, retired officers, Indians, negroes, besides
foreigners who trade in these ports. [These constitute] a great throng
of patients, and convince us that if so important a charity were to
fail or be neglected many dead persons would, to our sorrow, be found
in the streets and entresuelos [24] (the dwellings of the poor); and
others, worn out by their afflictions, would be suffering the pangs of
their necessities. These are relieved, in the present circumstances;
but the permanency of the work demands that the superiors to whom the
matter belongs shall aid us with laborers and encourage us with their
support, obtaining from the Catholic royal piety what they shall deem
suitable for this purpose."]

[Chapter ii recounts the royal decrees for the aid of the hospitals
at Manila, dated in the years 1590-96; the foundation (April 16,
1594) of the Misericordia brotherhood, and their establishment of
a hospital, which after 1596 opened its doors to all who needed its
aid; and the surrender of the royal hospital to their care (January
8, 1598), at the instance of Governor Francisco Tello--their labors
therein making evident the difference between the work accomplished
by pure charity and that done by persons hired to do it; they also
maintained Franciscan ministers for attending to the spiritual needs
of the sick. In the conflagration of May 1, 1603, the royal hospital
was utterly destroyed, "with the third part of the buildings of this
city, a loss which amounted to more than a million of pesos." Then
are enumerated the losses and calamities which rendered this loss
more grievous to the colony, the destructive earthquake of June 21,
1599, followed by lesser shocks and disturbances until the following
year of 1600; the loss of two richly-laden galleons (1599), the
"Santa Margarita" and "San Gerónimo;" the attack of Oliver van Noordt
(December, 1600); the wreck of the "Santo Thomas" (1601), and of
another galleon which was about to be launched at Panamao; the return
to port of the galleons despatched in 1602 and 1604; and the revolt
of the Chinese in May, 1603. A royal decree dated November 4, 1606,
directed Acuña to make every effort to rebuild the royal hospital;
meanwhile the Misericordia were aiding the throngs of people who,
made destitute by the various disasters above mentioned, implored
their help, and they spent in these exercises of charity eighty
thousand pesos in five years. Another royal decree (February 10,
1617) directed the Audiencia of Manila to place the hospitals there
in charge of the brethren of St. John of God, who were going thither
for that purpose; but the war with the Dutch and other hindrances
prevented them from carrying out this enterprise]

[Chapter iii states that about the year 1611 two brethren of this
order, Fray Juan de Gamboa and Fray Lucas de los Angeles, had arrived
in Manila, desirous to found a hospital; but that the authorities
there discouraged their plan. Some writer has stated that these
brethren returned in 1621 and founded a hospital for convalescents
at Bagumbaya; but Maldonado regards this as uncertain, and difficult
to verify, although some circumstances would indicate the probability
that they made a second attempt to establish their order at Manila. At
various times requests were sent from Manila for these hospitalers,
and in chapter iv are related the arrangements finally made by
the superiors of the order in Nueva España to send laborers to the
Philippines, which was accomplished in the spring of 1641; these were
Fray Andrés de San Joseph (a priest) and Fray Antonio de Santiago
(a lay brother). The warrant given them and other official documents
connected with their going are reproduced in full by Maldonado.]





CHAPTER V


[The brethren of St. John of God began their labors at Cavite, in
November of 1641. Corcuera provided lodgings for them in the royal
buildings, and the inhabitants contributed so liberally that they
were able to open a hospital of ten beds; but so great was the number
of applicants for its aid that in January following, the hospital
brethren asked for and received the surrender (January 30) to their
management of the royal hospital at Cavite, with all its property
and slaves--provided that within four years they obtain the royal
confirmation of this grant. An inventory of this hospital and its
equipment is more curious than edifying: "The house which served
as a hospital was of wood and piles, covered with tiling that was
old and in bad condition; for dispensary [botica], it had a wooden
framework containing various gallipots, vials, and earthen jars. In the
infirmary were sixteen mattresses, ten pillows, twenty-seven sheets,
two coverlets, and fourteen blankets; and its larder contained eighty
cabans of rice, forty gantas of oil, fifteen arrobas of sugar, and
four jars of conserves. For divine worship it had a box for an altar,
hardly fit [for such use]; a chalice with its paten, without any
ornament; a bell of medium size, and two small ones. For its service,
it had some slaves, five men and seven women. As for revenues, it
had three and a half residence lots and two lots occupied by shops,
which yielded twenty-six pesos and [word omitted?] granos a month;
also some woodlands, and a grazing tract in Leyton, a place near
the said port, with several head of horses and cattle. The most
important [of its assets] were the deliveries made from the [royal]
storehouses, for these were permanent; they had been ordered when
the said hospital was in charge of the religious of our seraphic
father St. Francis." These supplies, as appears from the records
of the treasury board of Manila, had been furnished since January
12, 1619, at the request of the Franciscans in charge of the Cavite
hospital. They asked, for immediate use, for "a dozen blankets, a dozen
cupping-glasses, two syringes, two pairs of Castilian scissors, two
clasp-knives, six lancets, two scarifiers; some wool for mattresses;
two books, one entitled De Medicina, by the author Barrios, and the
other by Dioscorides; four arrobas of Castilian wine; a barrel of
raisins and almonds; and half an arroba of rosado sugar." [25] For
regular annual supplies, they asked two hundred fanegas of cleaned
rice, as hitherto they had had no amount allotted for the hospital;
six hundred fowls, since they received only little more than two
hundred a year from those assigned them by his Majesty in Balayán;
and three hundred pesos from the royal treasury, to be spent for meat,
sugar, flour, and eggs, drugs from China, clothing for the slaves and
servants, and other needs of the hospital. All these were granted them,
and paid regularly until the hospital was placed in charge of the
Order of St. John of God (1642); "from that time there was a gradual
diminution, to such an extent that, by another general conference of
the treasury officials in 1657 the whole was reduced, so that by way
of contribution [from the government] only two hundred pesos should be
given, in the articles which should be required each year, and this
[only] in the interval until other provision should be made." At the
time when Maldonado wrote, all government aid had been taken away;
moreover, in 1645 the brethren had been obliged to vacate the royal
buildings, in which they had been conducting the Cavite hospital,
and were incommodiously quartered in some poor shops of the Sangleys;
but in October of that year the authorities granted them the use of an
empty building belonging to his Majesty; it was constructed of nipa and
bamboo, and had been occupied by some fishermen. The Cavite hospital
was rebuilt four times by the brethren of St. John: "the first time,
by the reverend father Fray Francisco de Magallanes, which lasted until
the year 1682; the second, by the reverend father Fray Marcos de Mesa,
a priest of the order, which lasted until the year 1699; the third,
by the reverend father Fray Juan de Alarcòn, a priest, which lasted
until the year 1728; and lastly, the one which is being built by the
present superior, Fray Antonio de Arçe. There is no doubt that this
will be established in so good order that it will be an improvement
on the previous ones; and meanwhile a house has been made ready,
with sufficient space for lodgings. This was given as a contribution
by Captain Don Miguel Cordero; and in it are maintained eight beds,
and the corresponding offices. The title of this hospital always was,
and still is, that of St. Joseph. All its receipts in the year hardly
reach two hundred and sixty pesos, a support so scanty that it is not
necessary to emphasize the straitened manner in which the religious
who minister in it must support themselves; the one who directs it has
the appointment of prior." The sick soldiers and seamen at Cavite are
sent to the royal hospital of Manila for treatment; if the money which
they cost there were handed over to the Cavite hospital it could take
better care of them than they now receive.]





CHAPTER VI


[A little more than two years after founding the Cavite hospital, the
hospitalers undertook to open a hospital for convalescents, where these
could have the dieting, rest, and care necessary for fully regaining
their health after they were discharged from the general hospitals;
for lack of these, many persons had before perished. Accordingly, they
obtained from Governor Corcuera permission (April 16, 1644) to erect
or buy a house for this purpose, to be situated on the Pasig River
above Manila; but circumstances afterward induced them to locate it at
Bagumbaya, a suburb south of the city, outside the walls--permission
being given for this by Faxardo in the following September. Here,
as in other places, Maldonado mentions this enterprise as a revival
of the one supposed to have been undertaken in 1621. It contained two
wards, one for men and one for women, in which twenty persons could be
cared for. This work was continued but a short time--partly for lack
of hospitalers, who had to devote their main energies to the hospital
in Manila; and partly because the Bagumbaya house had not sufficient
facilities for the entertainment of its inmates, who quickly grew
tired of remaining there and of the strict dieting necessary for
their full recovery, and went away--in the majority of cases, to die.]




SECTION VII

CHAPTER VII


[The religious of the order then devoted themselves to the Cavite
hospital, and to the one established by the Misericordia in Manila,
which that brotherhood placed in their charge in March, 1650; they
took possession of it on May 31 following. The conditions of this
transfer are given by Maldonado in full (pp. 86-93). The donation is
full and irrevocable, including all the property, servants, and incomes
of the hospital. The hospitalers are obliged to treat poor women who
are ill, both Spaniards and mestizas; also the slaves (both men and
women) of the citizens, who in such cases are expected to make an
offering to the hospital of three pesos each--save that for slaves
belonging to the seminary of Santa Isabel and to the Misericordia
this offering shall not be made. The latter institution shall be
regarded as the patron of the hospital, and shall aid it every year
with such contribution as is in its power, for necessary expenses and
the support of the sick. The women who are inmates of Santa Isabel
shall be treated by the brethren of St. John, so far as possible
in the seminary itself; and the medicines needed for these patients
shall be provided by the Misericordia, to the extent of two hundred
pesos a year in advance. The officers of that confraternity may visit
the hospital, and shall have the right to notify the superior of the
hospitalers of any deficiency or neglect they may find therein. Any
charitable person may erect a church or additional ward or wards in
connection with the institution, and be regarded as a patron thereof;
and such addition shall not be under the control of the officers of
the Misericordia. The hospital, however, shall retain the name of
that brotherhood, and alms or contributions for its benefit shall be
asked in its name. All property, incomes, rights, and credentials of
the institution shall be surrendered to the brethren of St. John,
who shall not be expected to give account to the Misericordia of
any contributions which they may receive; that association shall
also use all its influence with the authorities to secure their aid
and favor for the hospital in all ways, and to defend it from any
objections or difficulties which may arise against it, particularly
from the Franciscans, who formerly had been connected with it. In
case the hospital order shall lose all its laborers in the islands,
the Misericordia shall administer the hospital until the provincial of
St. John in Nueva España shall be able to send more of his brethren
to Manila; and provision is made for the final settlement of affairs
between that order and the Misericordia, in case they decide to sever
the present relations. The latter association shall pay at once to
the order eight hundred pesos in cash, for the necessary expenses
and equipment of the brethren in opening their hospital labors. All
the documents regarding this affair and other important transactions
of the Order of St. John are reproduced in full by Maldonado. On
taking possession of the hospital (May 31, 1656) the hospitalers
equipped three wards, with twelve beds in each, where men and women
might be cared for separately, and the Indians and Morenos apart
from the Spaniards. A small church was also erected, with lodgings
for the religious of the order; these buildings were injured in the
earthquake of July 19, 1664, but were repaired for use until new ones
could be erected. A new and large church was built, but this also was
wrecked by an earthquake in 1674; a new church and convent were then
built, which lasted until 1727, when they were found to be in so bad
condition from the repeated seismic shocks which they had undergone
that they must be reconstructed. This was accordingly done, the new
edifice being dedicated on May 10, 1732 (see chapters ix and x for full
description of it). This was the building which was standing at the
time of Maldonado's writing, and it had three wards, each containing
more than twenty beds; that for the women is especially praised for its
comfort and convenience. "During these last twelve years" [Zaragoza's
approbation states that the book was written in 1739] "there have been
admitted sixteen priests, secular clergy, one religious of our father
St. Dominic, two other religious of our seraphic father St. Francis,
seventy-six students from the four colleges which are in this city;
and from the laity, the licentiate Don Juan Francisco de Velasco,
auditor of this royal Audiencia, and a large number of citizens--not
to mention eight thousand poor persons of inferior condition and
rank. This appears from the books of registration, from which this
enumeration has been made. Attention was given to all these patients,
in accordance with their respective stations; and with the same
consideration burial was given to those who died."]





CHAPTER VIII

[Later, doubts arose as to the exercise of the right and title of
patronage which was reserved to the Misericordia in the foregoing
agreement; and certain individual members of that association,
"moved (as it is inferred) by pious although very indiscreet zeal,"
stirred up these doubts and made officious inquiries. Although they
did no harm, it was thought best to consult the heads of the Jesuit
university in regard to the objections thus raised; and their opinion
(undated) is given by Maldonado. Those learned professors declared
in favor of the hospitalers, saying that any official visitation and
inspection of their work could be made only by the archbishop of the
islands; the officers of the Misericordia might visit the hospital,
but could not, even as its patrons, exercise any legal authority or
compulsion over the brethren of St. John, or bring against them any
legal claim. The Jesuits refer to such a stipulation in the original
document transferring the hospital (chap, vii); they also remind the
Misericordia of the wretched condition in which the hospital was when
that association gave it up--for this purpose citing the inventory
made at that time of the property thus transferred. Some curious
particulars are found therein. The old hospital had but one ward,
under which was "the old chapel, where the dead were buried." One of
the items is, "Twelve head of slaves, most of them more than fifty
years old, and some past sixty." Its equipment of bedding, etc.,
comprises "four old tents of medriñaque; seven mattresses, made of
Ilocos blankets, with their outside badly worn; ten pillows, with
their covers of medriñaque, old; two tables, with tablecovers, with
six napkins, old; twelve sheets of Ilocos weave." Various articles
for the use or adornment of the altar in the church are listed, most
of them characterized as "old;" while an image of St. Joseph and the
Holy Child is "old and battered." There are "nine old cots for beds;"
"a large chest, old, without any key;" "an old wooden table, on which
the food is distributed;" "two old chairs for seats;" "four large
cots, for Spanish women;" "two old books which treat of medicine"
(evidently those asked for by the Franciscans in 1619); "one hundred
and twelve porcelain vials, empty;" "sixty-one gallipots of Chinese
porcelain, empty;" "two stone kitchen mortars, without handles;"
and some few other articles suitable for hospital use, that are
presumably in good condition. In view of these facts, there is no
ground for bringing complaints against the brethren of St. John,
especially since they were not obliged by the document of donation
to conform to any given standard in their management of the hospital,
nor was any provision made therein for summoning them to give account
thereof to the ordinary. The labors of conducting the hospital and
providing means for its support are quite arduous enough for the
order, without imposing upon it the burden of keeping accounts of
all the receipts and expenses--a charge which it probably would
not have accepted, and which cannot be now imposed upon it. The
income of the institution from the property surrendered with it--a
legacy from the late Captain Nicolas de Luzurriaga--does not exceed
a thousand pesos, which is a very inadequate endowment for meeting
all the expenses which must be incurred for the patients sent to
the hospital by the Misericordia, even if these number no more than
eight; and its scantiness prevents that association from making any
just claim to the exercise of authority over the hospital. Indeed,
the Jesuits censure the Misericordia for having done so little
for the institution since they surrendered it to the brethren of
St. John. Further: "Apparently the mistake of the Board [of the
Misericordia] consists in their being surprised that the sick are not
better treated or regaled in the said hospital, when they see that the
Order of St. John of God has an encomienda granted by his Majesty the
king (whom may God preserve), a ranch of cattle and cultivated lands,
some lots occupied by shops in the Parian outside the walls of Manila,
and other considerable revenues--which, as evidently appears, are all
considered as possessions of the said hospital of the Misericordia,
of which they are patrons--[a mistake which arises] from seeing that
all these are possessed by the religious of St. John of God, but not
making a distinction in regard to what belongs to that order as an
order, for the support of its brethren. Such is the ranch; when, in
the year 49, Captain Don Pedro Gomez Cañete lay sick in the hospital
for convalescents at Bagumbaya, without the walls of this city, he
made a donation, by a clause of his last will and testament, of the
said farms to the said religious order. Suit having been brought by
Captain Geronimo Fuentes for a sum of money which the said Captain
Don Pedro Gomez Cañete owed, the aforesaid properties were placed
at public auction, and the said religious order secured in the said
auction, for a bid of 12,100 pesos, the said ranch and some shops
in the Parian--nineteen of them upper, and twenty lower; and eight
other shops for the peddlers, with their lodging-rooms above. The
said order also obtained at public auction eight residence lots in
the locality of La Hermita and Santiago de Bagumbaya (which were
the ones where they started their work), and some others which they
bought. The site and locality where the church and convent of the
said order are at present built were the houses which belonged to
Captain Don Alonso Parrilla; these also were secured at auction, for
the price of 3,000 pesos, by paying in cash (as it did) 2,650 pesos,
and the remainder of the 3,000 was left in a mortgage that could be
paid up, the said order paying the amount due every year to this same
Board of the holy Misericordia. Another [resource is] a chaplaincy
of masses to the Holy Ghost and the Conception, which was founded by
Doña Hypolita de Zarate y Osseguerra. These incomes have nothing to
do with the hospital as a hospital; and therefore, in accordance with
this, the members of the Board cannot require that these revenues
be subjected to official investigation, any more than in the case
of other contributions and incomes which other benefactors had left
to the said hospital, even though the proceeds of these are handled,
and surrendered to the said religious, by this same Misericordia as
administrators for the said benefactors; for the members of the Board
have no rights as patrons over any of these, as is clearly stated in
the agreement made in the conditions of donation." "From all this,
the fathers rector and masters of this university of the Society of
Jesus conclude that only with the gravest scruples of conscience,
and at the risk of defaming the said religious order by accusations
of omission or negligence in fulfilling their obligation to render
assistance to the said sick persons, can the members of the Board
on this pretext demand before the illustrious archbishop that the
said religious be visited, and account be demanded from them of the
expenses and receipts, and of other matters pertaining to the said
assistance--not only in regard to all the incomes which the hospital
order, as such, possesses, noting down the contributions from all the
benefactors of it; but as little even the proceeds which by the said
donation the religious received from this same brotherhood of the
holy Misericordia--since that is expressly contrary to the agreement
made with the said religious order in the instrument of donation, and
would be a very heavy and onerous new burden upon it, if imposed now,
after sixty years, on a donation which was originally free, complete,
and irrevocable." This opinion is signed by Joseph Hernandéz, Antonio
Arias, Pablo Clain, Nicolas de Zarate, and Joseph de Bobadilla. [26]
It brought about a cessation of the controversy, and afterward, the
hospital and its labors grew in public esteem and many favors were
bestowed on it.]





CHAPTERS IX-XII


[These chapters are devoted to a history and description of the church
and convent erected in 1727, an account of the solemn functions
annually celebrated therein, instances of miraculous intervention
by the Virgin, etc. The church was dedicated on May 10, 1732, with
festivities and solemn ceremonies which lasted during eight days. On
the last day an oration was delivered by the Dominican Fray Juan de
Arrechedera, who is styled by our writer "the Tullius of Manila." The
church measured one hundred and fifty feet in length, and forty-two
in breadth; Maldonado describes it, both within and without, with
much detail, and presents a large illustration of the exterior of the
edifice, which is herewith reproduced on a smaller scale. Among the
notable donors to the adornment and furnishing are Don Buenaventura
Morales, a physician in Manila; Don Juan Monroy, court secretary of the
Audiencia; General Antonio Gonzalez Quijano; Don Joseph Antonio Nuño
de Villavicencio, a regidor of Manila; General Miguel de Allanegui,
secretary of the government; Doctor Joseph Correa Villareal, an
advocate of the Audiencia; and General Joseph de Morales.]

[In chapter xi occurs a curious digression in the midst of the
descriptions of the solemn functions solemnized in the hospital
church; enumeration of the instances of miraculous aid afforded
by the Virgin to her devotees gives occasion for an account of the
system of weights used by the Chinese traders in the islands, and
the change made from these to the Castilian system. General Joseph
Antonio Nuño de Villavicencio "also relates that commission had been
given to him to abolish the use of a certain make of steelyards
[pesadores] customary with the Chinese and other foreigners, with
which commerce had been carried on in this city from the earliest
times; and to establish [a system of] weights and measures modeled
on the Castilian, according to the provisions of the laws of both
kingdoms. He recognized that the serious nature of this charge demanded
the most extraordinary exertions, or else that the hindrances should
be removed which had hindered it from being effective on occasions
when, at various times, the [same] attempt had been made. But, being
also stimulated by his own reputation, in order not to be conquered
by the difficulty without a previous investigation, and being incited
to close application by his interest in a transaction as much to the
service of his Majesty as to the general welfare of the commonwealth,
he proceeded to the consideration of the importance of this business
(the serious inconveniences of which might defeat his efforts), and
of the risk incurred for his reputation if, after he had accepted the
commission, he could not fulfil it; and the more he thought about
it, the less did he unravel the tangle. At last, in his anxiety he
found no recourse more certain of success than to offer himself
to the divine favor [as expressed] in that sovereign object, the
holy image [of the Virgin]; and in this confidence he carried on the
enterprise, heedless of any risk, and succeeded in his object, to the
satisfaction of the many who before were disparaging it as chimerical,
or who regarded it as impracticable. He gained the approbation of the
royal Audiencia so thoroughly that it conferred upon him new powers
for [introducing] the same arrangement in all the provinces of its
jurisdiction in these islands, where the same injurious effect was
experienced; and he executed this commission with exactness, sending
[to all places] carefully regulated models and instructions for making
it effective." Maldonado then goes on to describe the mode of weight
formerly in vogue among the Chinese traders, as well as the Castilian
system, thus:]



Form of the Chinese balances

Let me be the first to explain the construction of the Chinese balances
which were in use; they were called da-Chens. In shape it resembled
a steelyard [romana]; the yard or beam was made of a kind of wood
which they call palma brava, [27] and in its form was like a mace
for playing truck [trucos]--except the butt, which at the extremity
was thicker. It had a sort of frame of copper, octagonal in shape,
with its movable pointer in the middle [con su espiga en medio de
movimiento], and some pendent hooks. For indicating the weights, there
were certain points marked by nails, set at proportionate distances,
but without any numbers or any other characters to show the weight
definitely. For counterweight there was a piece of metal or of stone
hanging by a cord, but without any sign or mark by which the dachen
or balance could make known what was entrusted to it. [28] To this
badly-constructed instrument the handling of all kinds of merchandise
had been reduced, and the trade was carried on [by it] among Spaniards,
Chinese, Indians, and Morenos; and through necessity they--even the
superiors and prelates--employed this balance on all occasions that
arose, from the earliest times of the conquest until the year 1727,
when the measure that is here discussed was carried into effect. This
was not because the project had not been brought forward repeatedly,
and at various times, but because the difficulties which hindered it
could not be obviated. But, to continue the subject, so well known
was the uncertainty of those dachens that even the very Chinese,
although it originated in their own country, stipulated beforehand for
every transaction the balance by which [the goods] must be received or
delivered; for each one of them regarded the balance which he himself
used as the better reckoner. There were small ones, for weighing gold
and silver; and others that were larger, for bulky goods. The weights
by the smaller ones were computed in taels, each one corresponding
to twenty adarmes of our Castilian weight. From the tael there was
a diminution down to granos, of which six were worth one adarme;
but these names were never common in our language. [29] The chief
weight consisted of cates, each about twenty-two onzas; the chinanta,
which was equivalent to about ten cates, and in our Castilian weight
to thirteen libras and twelve onzas; the quintal, which was worth
about eight chinantas, or eighty cates, and corresponded to about one
hundred and ten libras of our weight; and the largest was called pico,
which was reckoned at ten chinantas, or one hundred cates, and in our
weight five and a half arrobas. But as this correspondence of weight
to weight was prevented as people understood more thoroughly the lack
of accuracy in the said balances, and the [cause for] suspicion of
the way in which they were managed by the Chinese--a people of such
cunning that in their own land fraud is a science, in which degrees are
given--the Spaniards found themselves compelled to depend on computing
the equivalent [in Castilian weight], according to the greater or less
skill of each person [in reckoning]; but the ignorance of the Indians
and the common people, exposed [as they were] to the insatiable greed,
lack of piety, and unscrupulousness of the said Sangleys, who gained
great profits from this practice, aided the subtlety of the latter.



Difficulties which arose in regard to the introduction of new weights

This fact being established, from it follows the reason of the
difficulty, which is the subject (and to this end the considerations)
on which argument arises. In order to suppress the use of the
said dachens, it was necessary to have in reserve other weighing
instruments, with which the commerce, both wholesale and retail,
could be regulated. In order to establish the Castilian weights, there
must be specimens of the original standards which had to be followed,
according to the royal decrees, to which weights must be conformed;
and a factory must be established for the number of instruments which
the new order of things would require. There was an absolute lack of
everything; and therefore it was necessary either to permit the use
of the dachens, or to make a general prohibition of commerce in the
commodities for which the said balances served. To adopt any expedient
less onerous was not allowed in the commission; that the former [i.e.,
the use of the Chinese weights] should be continued was the very
thing which he [i.e., General Villavicencio] was ordered to prevent;
to deny trade to the people would be ridiculous and ineffectual. The
custom was as old as the Spanish occupancy of the country; the serious
danger of disturbances, [if he undertook] to regulate steelyards by
guess, without observing the exactness [required by] the laws, was a
new difficulty; delay [would be ir]remediable, and the general injury
irreparable! Let the most discreet person, then, infer from these
circumstances whether the undertaking was an arduous one, whether
the least [in]advertence would be conspicuous, and [what were] the
risks to his reputation for good judgment; and whether recourse to
sovereign aid would be urgent for his success....



Castilian weight

The reckoning of our Castilian marco in accordance with the laws
which prescribe its form originates with grains of wheat. The weight
of thirty-six grains is computed as an adarme; sixteen of these
make one onza, and sixteen onzas one libra; twenty-five libras
make one arroba, and four arrobas the greatest weight, which is a
quintal. Laying aside the declarations that wheat may not be used
to supplement the established weights of metal (a custom of various
ports and provinces), it appears that, with only this information,
a corresponding standard could not be made in Manila, since it was
deficient in that species of wheat to which the laws refer, and
although there is likewise a harvest of these grains in Philipinas,
and quantities of wheat are also brought hither from China--some
[having grains] of larger size and less weight, and others that are
small and compact--the variety in them arouses great uncertainty, for a
matter so delicate. Certain it is that, whatever might be taken for the
origin [of this computation], it must produce a system corresponding
[to the Castilian]; and, by being made general for both buying and
selling goods, it would furnish due fulfilment to the form prescribed
in the respective laws. But, as that system would always be deemed
more conformable to the intention of the laws the more [nearly] its
ratios were identical [with those of Castilla], and when the variety
of weights and measures (which, considering the laborious nature of
mercantile operations and the interests at stake in them, is at times
a very onerous burden) in the provinces with which trade is carried on
should be reduced to a common basis: as these islands possess the trade
with Nueva España, the importance which any unforeseen disagreement
might indicate could not be overlooked. This consideration led to
the most careful investigation of the basis to which the matter
could be reduced; and, in order to find the system equivalent [to
that of Castilla], various standards were adjusted to one another,
from which a safe conclusion might be drawn. Accordingly, grains of
lentils (which give name to the marco [30] of Aragon) were taken, and
search was made for grains of wheat whose weight would correspond,
with the difference of one-eighth. The same was done with grains of
alberjones [31] (from which sort originated the marco of Venecia),
and it was found that the weight of each one agreed with that of
four grains of separated wheat. The same was done with chick-peas
[garvanzos] (from which the marco of Flandes took its origin), and it
was found that one of these weighed the same as thirty-six grains of
wheat. As a result, through the weight of the aforesaid legumes, in
the respective ratios of the marcos of Aragon, Venecia, and Flandez,
and the corresponding weight of the grains of wheat, to which reference
is made by our Castilian marco, sufficient basis was formed on which
to make the standards [of weight]. In fact, they were made by this
rule, weights of metal being made which should correspond to one,
two, and three grains of wheat, and which together should weigh as
much as the weight which is called a grano of silver; another of one,
two, and three granos of this sort, the aggregate of which should be
equivalent to the weight of one adarme; and by this [were established]
the rest of the weights corresponding [to those of Castilla], as far
as that one which would contain one onza, from which resulted the
greater weights of libras and arrobas. Metal weights were also made
equivalent to half a grain of wheat, and to one-fourth, one-eighth,
one-sixteenth, and one-thirty-second of a grain, which last is the
same as the eleven hundred and fifty-second part of the adarme; or,
if this latter weight were divided into so many and small parts,
each one of them would alike agree with the weight made for the
thirty-second part of the grain of wheat.



The standard of weight kept in the repository

This careful attention to details is better set forth by a statement of
the skill and delicacy [displayed] in the construction of the weighing
instrument which serves as standard in this capital, and is kept in the
archives in the building of the municipal cabildo; it is a work which
for its elegance might be valued in any one of the principal cities
of España and of the Indias. It is a small one, such as is required
by the weights which it carries; it is made in the form of a cross, of
rich tombac [32] and the finest gold. In the semicircle which indicates
the play of the index needle, a pendent pearl serves as ornament. The
scales are of the same metal, gold and tombac, and the silken threads
which sustain them of silk dyed red. The whole instrument works with
so rigid exactness that when the smallest weight--a thirty-second of
a grain of wheat, or the eleven hundred and fifty-second part of an
adarme--which is an almost imperceptible amount, is placed in either
of the said scales the index of this steelyard shows the difference.



Remarkable agreement of weights

[That which had been] the physical probability of conformity of this
construction [with the standard of Castilla] was rendered certain
with remarkable exactness. Commission was given by the cabildo
of this city that twenty-five steelyards should be sent from the
kingdom of Nueva España; and, these having been brought hither at
the time when the aforesaid steelyards and the weights, both large
and small, were already made, [the cabildo] proceeded to make the
comparison [between these and those] with judicial solemnity and the
assistance of experts. This transaction having been completed with
the exactness which its importance rendered urgent, the two sets of
steelyards were found to agree so closely that it appeared that in
those sent from Nueva España the scales were balanced by the weights
made in Manila, or that these were the regular weights for the said
steelyards!... This measure, be it worthy of record, began with the
benefit to the common people of these islands in the suppression [33]
of the da-chens, or Chinese steelyards; for the easy and continual
fraud therein was computed by an official as being, in the limits
of Manila alone, more than thirty thousand pesos a year--an evil so
deeply rooted that few persons supposed that it could be remedied. So
far did this go that the Marquès de Torre-Campo, then governor of
these islands (whose prudent moderation was always honored), at the
time when permission was asked from him for the publication of the
proclamation by which the new usage was established and the old one
prohibited, made very sententious remarks expressing his opinion that
the said effort would be useless on account of the difficulties which,
he inferred, would obstruct its effectiveness. But experience proved
that he was mistaken; for in twenty-four hours [from that time] it
would have been difficult to find any Chinese steelyard, if search
had been made. It appears from the original acts--and these have been
furnished to us for this relation, which in everything punctually
follows and refers to them--that before reaching this last step, the
publication of the prohibition of Chinese weights, the authorities
caused to be made as large a number of properly regulated steelyards
as the shops and guilds which use them might reasonably be expected
to need. Then the Chinese were notified that the da-chens which
they used should be brought forward; these were retained [by the
authorities], and Castilian steelyards were given [in place of them],
with printed instructions for observance by those who used them;
and steelyards for the use of the public were set in various places,
with trustworthy persons [in charge], who could instruct persons of
little understanding. And it is generally known that, although this was
a matter of so serious tendency, and included every class of persons,
not the slightest disturbance arose; for all knew its importance, and
in order to enjoy the convenience [of the new weights] submitted to
learn the first rudiments of knowledge [about them]; and perplexity
[on this point] lasted but a short time, or was not evident at all,
for in matters which concern one's interests close application makes
progress, even in the dullest persons.

[In chapter xii are enumerated the distinguished persons who have been
buried in the new hospital church since its erection. Among these
were five infant children (1728-36) of Villavicencio, the regidor
who had so liberally aided the institution; at two of these funerals
disputes arose over the rights of certain officials to precedence
as pallbearers. Another benefactor, General Allanegui, was buried in
the church (April, 1736); and three years later General Don Gregório
Padilla y Escalante, who lived in the village of Binondo. A sad
tragedy is hinted at in the record, although it is mentioned chiefly
in connection with ecclesiastical quarrels over parish dues and the
disputed right of interring the poor corpse. On January 26, 1736,
a Spanish girl of about fifteen years was brought to the hospital;
she had been found stretched on the ground near the door of the
seminary church of Santa Isabel, bruised and senseless, and died in
about an hour, without recovering consciousness. No one knew who she
was; but her body was placed near the door of the hospital church,
to see if any person would recognize it. Several identified it as
that of Doña Josepha de Leon, a pupil in the said seminary, who in a
temporary insanity had flung herself from the roof of that building
to the street below.]





CHAPTER XIII


[This chapter is devoted to an account of the government of the
province of the Order of St. John; a list of its provincials, with
their terms of office; and a list of all the members of the order
therein, at the time of writing this history. This province had
always been subject to the very reverend commissary-general of the
order resident in Nueva España; and, as its funds did not permit
it to bring men from Europe, the superior at Manila would admit
novices who wished to engage in the work of the order. These, when
sufficiently instructed, if they showed a true vocation for that work
were received into the order, and thus its numbers were sufficiently
recruited to sustain its labors. The choice of a provincial for the
islands was always reserved to the said commissary at Mexico, who
usually reappointed the same man, when he had been found competent for
that office; this appointee was regarded as the vicar and visitor
for the commissary (except in the matter of authority to grant
dismissory letters to members of the order), and those titles were
bestowed on the prior of the Manila convent (the principal house),
regarded to all intents and purposes as provincial, but with the
modest title of "superior" [prelado]. The province had four houses:
those at Cabite and Manila, and two others, at Bagumbaya and Zebù
respectively. When Maldonado wrote, the two former alone remained. The
prior at Cabite was nominally appointed by the commissary at Mexico;
but the uncertainties, delays, and costs caused by the distance thither
and the long and dangerous voyage rendered it necessary to leave this
choice practically in the hands of the superior at Manila. The brethren
of the community met every three years to elect councilors and transact
other business. The superior appointed a procurator-general, manager
of the hospital, and other minor officials. Besides the priests and
brethren of the order, certain men called donados were admitted to
its ranks for the service of the poor and for the commoner duties of
the convent. In the month of November of each year, the officers of
the Misericordia visited the hospital officially--it being definitely
understood that they had no right to meddle with its management in
any way. On New Year's day of each year, the community assembled and
chose by lot a patron saint for the coming year.]

[Following is the list of superiors (not counting Fray Juan de Gamboa,
who came in 1621, because his attempt to establish the order proved
abortive): (1) Father Fray Andrès de San Joseph, a native of Mexico;
his patent was dated February 20, 1641 and he ruled the province until
August 3, 1643. (2) Father Fray Francisco Magallanes, a Portuguese;
he received his credentials on March 10, 1643, but did not go to the
islands that year; he took possession on August 3, 1644, and held
the office until August 4, 1662. (3) Father Fray Francisco Cardoso,
a Portuguese; he immediately succeeded Magallanes (by whom he was
appointed, under special authority conferred by the commissary), and
held the office for four years. (4) Father Fray Christoval Nieto de
Salazar, a native of Mexico; he ruled from September 4, 1666 until
August 9, 1669. (5) Father Fray Marcos de Mesa, a native of Tescuco,
Mexico, held office from August 9, 1669 until his death in 1682. (6)
Father Fray Luis de la Cruz, a Canari by birth, next held the office,
from 1682 until his death on January 25, 1683; he came to Manila as
alternate for the regular appointee, Fray Fructuoso de Texada (who
died three days after he reached the port of Cavite); opposition
to his rule arose in the order itself, but he was finally placed in
possession of the office by the provisor of the archdiocese, aided by
military force. (7) Father Fray Phelipe de Jesus, a native of Manila,
was superior from January 25, 1683 until September 2, 1684. (8) Father
Fray Antonio de Robles, a native of Mexico, ruled from September 2,
1684 until 1687; he then went to Zebù, and was ordained a secular
priest (9) Father Fray Phelipe de Jesus, as chief councilor, took the
place of Fray Robles, and held office for three years. (10) Father Fray
Domingo de Santa Maria, a Vizcayan, governed the province from July 16,
1690 until 1692, when he also entered the secular priesthood. (11) For
the third time, Fray Phelipe de Jesus held the office of superior, this
time from July 21, 1692 until July 8, 1694. (12) Father Fray Manuel
de San Romàn then took his place, ruling until August 13, 1697. (13)
Father Fray Francisco Beltràn, a native of Manila; as chief councilor,
he took the place of Fray Phelipe de Jesus, who died after having
been appointed superior by the commissary; Beltràn held the office
only one year. (14) Father Fray Geronimo Nadales, a native of Habana,
was sent over by the commissary, and ruled from August 28, 1698 until
his death, January 20, 1703. (15) Father Fray Ignacio Gil de Arevalo,
a native of Mexico; as chief councilor, he took Nadales's place,
which he filled until his death in 1706. (16) Father Fray Francisco
Hurtado, a native of Mexico; he was second in the council, and became
superior through election by the community after the death of Fray Gil;
much opposition arose from a disaffected faction, but Hurtado held
the office (although with some subsequent limitations of authority)
from 1706 until August 11, 1708. (17) Father Fray Juan de Santacruz,
a native of Manila, was superior during the next three years. (18)
Father Fray Francisco Hurtado secured the commissary's nomination,
and held the office from August 11, 1711 to July 13, 1720; "in his
time there was a notable decline in this province." (19) Father Fray
Santiago Gutierrez, a native of Manila, ruled from July 13, 1720 to
August 12, 1724; he was then deposed and secluded by the archdiocesan
ordinary: Maldonado regrets the injury thus inflicted on the order
and its privileges, but discreetly refrains from open censure of
this proceeding. (20) Father Fray Lucas de San Joseph, a native of
Manila; he was prior of Cabite, and took the place of Fray Gutierrez;
he entered the office on August 19, 1724, and ruled only two months,
being requested to resign, as a result of various discords among the
brethren. (21) Father Fray Eugenio Antonio del Niño Jesus, a native of
La Puebla, Mexico; he was chosen by the community, in place of Fray San
Joseph, and held office from October 3, 1724 until June 17, 1726. He
restrained the discontent and disputes which were rife in the order,
and his firmness and good management prevented what would have been
great disasters to the province. (22) Fray Antonio de Arce, a native
of Mexico City (the superior at the time when Maldonado wrote); he was
sent by the commissary with additional powers, assumed his office on
June 17, 1726, and completed the good work begun by his predecessor;
he restored harmony in the province, replaced the dilapidated buildings
with new ones, and secured for his order the respect and prestige which
it had largely lost under inefficient superiors. Maldonado eulogizes
Fray Arce's abilities, energy, and good judgment--qualities which
have advanced the order in Manila to equality with the others there.]

[Our writer enumerates the minor officials of the order at the time
of his writing. There are three chaplains and preachers: father Fray
Marcos Beltràn (who made his profession in 1740), a native of Cabite;
father Fray Juan Manuel Maldonado de Puga, a native of Quautla,
Mexico, who came to the islands in 1727; and father Fray Raphael
Fernandez (professed in 1732), a native of Manila. The two councilors
are father Fray Santiago Gutierrez (professed in 1700), a native of
Manila; and father Fray Joseph Hidalgo (professed in 1732), a native
of Mexico. The hospital is in charge of father Fray Joseph Guerrero,
a native of Chalco, Mexico, who came to the islands in 1726. The
procurator-general is father Fray Joseph Mariano (professed in 1722),
a native of Manila; and the chief sacristan is father Fray Joachin
de San Joseph (professed in 1729), a native of Mexico. The prior of
the Cabite convent is father Fray Diego de San Raphael (professed in
1724), a native of Octumba, Mexico. The list of brethren then in the
convent is as follows:]

Conventual religious.--Father Fray Eugenio Antonio del Niño Jesus,
former prior of this convent (where he professed on March 8, 1709),
a native of the city of Los Angeles in Nueva España; it has been
ten years during which he has remained in a continual suspension of
natural motions--his head bowed, in profound silence (not speaking,
unless he is questioned, and then only what is strictly necessary);
he is, in the opinion of many, crazy, but, in the judgment of those who
direct his conscience, he is sane. Father Fray Jacinto de los Dolores,
a native of this city; a son of this convent, where he professed on
January 15, 1717. Father Fray Lucas de San Joseph, a native of this
city; formerly prior of this convent, where he professed on July 25,
1717. Father Fray Andrès Gonzalez, a native of Mexico in Nueva España,
from which he came to this convent in the year 1726. Father Fray
Francisco Diaz de Rivera, a native of Mexico in Nueva España, from
which he came to this country in the year 1735. Father Fray Pedro
de Noroña, a native of Queretaro in the archbishopric of Mexico; he
professed in this convent on October 24, 1730. Father Fray Francisco
Varaona y Velazques, a native of Mexico in Nueva España; he professed
in this convent on February 20, 1735. Father Fray Thomàs Bernardo de
Herrera, a native of Zafra in Estremadura, in the bishopric of Badajòz,
in the kingdoms of España; he professed in this convent on June 13,
1736. Father Fray Pedro Ladron de Guevara, a native of Mexico in
Nueva España; he professed in this convent on June 13, 1736.

Junior religious.--Fray Bernardino de Vilches y Padilla, a native
of the city of Sevilla in the kingdoms of España; he professed in
this convent on March 7, 1739. Fray Lorenzo Velasco y Castroverde,
a native of Mexico in Nueva España; he professed in this convent on
May 7, 1739. Fray Feliciano Leal del Castillo, a native of the city of
Zebù, the chief city of the bishopric of that name in these islands;
he professed in this convent on April 26, 1739.

Brothers who are novices.--Brother Santiago Mariano San Ginès, who
comes from the port of Cabite in the Philipinas Islands; he took
the habit on December 7, 1739. Brother Juan Maldonado, a native of
this city of Manila; he took the habit on the said day, December 7,
1739. Brother Nicolàs Mariano del Rio, a native of the village of
Binondo, outside the walls of this city; he took the habit on the said
day, December 7 of the said year, 1739. Brother Perez de Albornòz,
a native of the City of Mexico in Nueva España; he took the habit on
the said day, December 7, in the said year.

Brothers who are donados.--Brother Salvador de la Soledad, a native
of Bacolor, in the province of Pampanga; he is punctual in obedience,
silence, and humility, continual in prayer, very austere, and of
fervent charity. Brother Francisco de los Dolores, a native of
the city of Gorgota, in the kingdom of Vengala, in the territory of
India. Brother Luis Casimiro, a native of this city. Brother Cayetano
del Castillo, a native of this city. Brother Juan Ferrer, a native
of this city. Brother Pablo Bertucio de San Antonio, a native of the
village of Biñàn in this archbishopric.

[Maldonado makes special mention of a few distinguished members of
the order in Manila, who have flourished in recent years; regarding
others, he states that he lacks information. Father Fray Marzelo
del Arroyo, a native of Manila, entered the order at Cabite, and
died at Manila, past the age of ninety years; he was "an excellent
physician, and a strong defender of the privileges of the regulars;"
and he filled with distinction all the offices of the order except
that of superior. Father Fray Francisco Alabes, a native of the city
of Oaxaca, Mexico, was the first who took the habit of St. John (1647)
in these islands; he rendered excellent service in the Cabite hospital,
and assisted Father Magallanes in founding the one at Bagumbaya. Father
Fray Juan de Alarcòn had many gifts; he was a noted orator, who was
called "Golden Mouth," [34] a famous poet, and a zealous defender
of the order; for a long time he was physician for the entire city,
and administrator of the convent at Cabite and of the ranch of San
Juan de Buenavista, belonging to the order; he died at an advanced
age. Father Fray Bernardo Xavier, a native of La Puebla in Mexico;
he had held the chair of theology in the Jesuit university in Manila,
and his brethren there called him "a sun eclipsed;" in disposition
retiring, humble, austere, devout, and charitable, he was attracted
to the labors of the brethren of St. John, and entered their ranks
on November 25, 1671; he died on August 14, 1720. Three religious
of this order were slain by the natives: Fray Antonio de Santiago,
manager of the ranch, slain by the savage Negritos (probably before
1650); Fray Lorenzo Gomez, killed while traveling in Ilocos by
the savage Tinguianes of the mountains; Fray Juan Antonio Guemez,
killed with lances by the native bandits "who infested our estate
of Buenavista." Maldonado suggests that some member of the order act
as recorder of its annals and labors, so that hereafter these may be
kept in remembrance, and published for its benefit.]





CHAPTER XIV

Incomes and contributions which belong to the hospital order for its
maintenance and that of the religious in this province.


[Estate of Buenavista.--"By donation from Captain Don Pedro Gomez
Cañete, various farm-sites and cavallerías [35] of lands belonged to us
in an estate called Buenavista, Pinaot, and Bolo, in the jurisdiction
of Bulacan, provinces close to Manila. But as the donor when he died
left debts behind, the lands were appraised, with preference of the
legacies to the debts of justice; [36] and the said property being
placed at royal auction, with the offerings of other benefactors, the
highest bid was made on the part of our order, in the sum of twelve
thousand one hundred pesos. Afterward other lands were added to this
estate, by donations and purchases which were made, and questions
arose over the boundaries; but, as we have for our defense the just
titles, the crown [37] has maintained us in the legitimate possession
of the lands, which is evident from the records and decisions, which
are here set down verbatim, and which declare it." Here follow the
documents which show that Cañete received a grant, April 4, 1629,
of two farm-sites and three cavallerías of land in the village of San
Miguel, the former part of the grant being opposed by the Indians of
Candaba; another was made to Gonzalo Ronquillo Ballesteros, September
26, 1601, of "two farms for horned cattle, and four cavallerías of
land, in the district of Alatib, toward Candaba, close to Canagoan;"
and the boundaries were settled by acts of the Audiencia, March 2 and
May 14, 1715. "These said lands, those which were likewise obtained
by the accountant Pedro de Almansa, and others which belonged to the
monastery of Santa Clara, were sold to the aforesaid Don Pedro Gomez
Cañete, and are among those which were purchased, as was related in
the beginning [of this book]; and afterward were added to it other lots
of land, all which compose the estate of Buenavista, which belongs to
our order in these islands." In 1715 the hospital brethren complained
that the Augustinians had intruded upon their lands, and were even
building a house thereon, paying no heed to the repeated remonstrances
of the superior of St. John; but the acts above cited confirmed the
order in its possession of the lands, and ordered the Augustinians
to cease work on their house and give account of their procedure. "In
this estate there are arable lands, pastures for the many cattle with
which it is stocked, fruit-trees, and woodlands where the trees are
cut for lumber. It was always maintained with one religious, who, as
administrator, had charge of its produce; but when an opportunity to
rent it occurred, it was considered best, and even more profitable,
to do so. For it we receive five hundred pesos, and three hundred
cabans of rice, annually for the period of five years, which is the
present agreement, and it is well guaranteed."]

Irrigated lands in the district of Polo.--By a donation which Fray
Thomas Ortiz, one of our religious, made to this convent--it belonged
to the lawful share which he inherited from his parents--we possess
certain irrigated lands [38] in the place which is called Colòn, within
the limits of the village of Polo, in the province of Bulacàn. The
co-heirs brought suit in regard to these lands; but this, when tried
in the courts, was declared in our favor. The said lands yield forty
pesos as yearly rent.

Grainfields in Bonga.--By purchase made of six quiñons of land,
[irrigated?] grainfields, [39] in a place which they call Bonga, within
the limits of Balivag, a village in the said province of Bulacàn,
[our order] enjoys the usufruct of one hundred and twenty pesos,
which these lands pay as annual rent.

Lots outside the walls.--By the donations and contributions of
different benefactors, we possess eight lots in various places,
from the village of La Hermita to that of Bagumbaya; these pay
in land-rents eighteen pesos a year. In this land is included the
original site on which was located the hospital for convalescents,
which was founded by the first religious [of our order] who came to
these islands, as is elsewhere related.

Properties in the Pariàn.--In the Alcayzerìa, the Pariàn of the
Sangleys, outside the walls, were purchased two properties, on which
there are forty-seven shops and upper lodgings; these, when occupied,
yield ninety-seven pesos a month, which amounts through the year to
one thousand one hundred and sixty-four pesos.

Lots in Manila.--For two houses, and two lots besides, which belong
to this convent within Manila, are collected thirteen pesos a month
for rent, which amounts to one hundred and fifty-six pesos a year.

Contribution from the brothers of our order.--The present superior,
father Fray Antonio de Arze, by his great affability established the
roll of lay brothers devoted to our order. Those who at present appear
on it regularly number one hundred and thirty-four and each one has a
certain day for supplying food to the sick; this he compensates with
six pesos, which he contributes as an offering, the amount being thus
regulated--in all, amounting to eight hundred and four pesos a year.

The contribution-plate.--The contribution-plate which, with the image
of our holy father, [40] [is carried] through the streets to ask for
offerings gathers during the week at least eight pesos, which amount
to two hundred and eighty-eight pesos a year.

Contribution for the feast of our holy father.--For the feast-day
of our holy father two of our religious go out a few days before,
as representatives of our community, to ask for contributions among
the citizens; and they collect very nearly two hundred pesos a year.

Contribution of rice.--In the month of October in each year a religious
is despatched to the province of Ilocos, in order to push forward the
collection and remittance of the proceeds from the encomienda which
is assigned to us in that province, and at the same time he asks for
contributions among the farmers of that region; he carries, by way
of precaution, some medicine, and benevolently exercises the office
of his calling; and if the harvests are good he collects offerings
of about seven hundred baskets of rice. And so great is the esteem
felt in that province for our religious, as they have acknowledged,
that when they go away in the month of March (which is the time of the
monsoon) the people display to them their regret that they must lack
the consolation which they receive during the stay of our religious, in
the assistance given by them to the many persons stricken by disease.





CHAPTER XV


[This chapter is devoted to enumeration of the favors extended by
the crown to the hospital order. Maldonado states that the royal
grants to the ecclesiastical estate in the islands (in stipends
and contributions) amount to more than 81,000 pesos a year, without
counting over 11,000 pesos more which are allowed to the royal chapel
and the hospitals. The brethren of St. John share in this bounty, to a
liberal extent. A royal decree of June 19, 1680, granted to the order
an encomienda of 500 tributes for twenty years, in order to repair
the injuries caused to the hospital buildings by the earthquake of
March 15, 1676, and to aid in carrying on its good work. In accordance
therewith, Governor Cruzelaegui assigned to the order (February 9,
1685) the following encomiendas: "The rest of Purao and Tagurin,
and the village of Pedic in the province of Ilocos, which consists
of 115 tributes, vacant by the death of Captain Don Nicolàs de Ibar,
who was enjoying it for the second life. Also the encomienda of
three-fourths of Pilitan and its subjects in the province of Cagayan,
which consists of 287 tributes, vacant by the death of Juan de Robles
Aldaba, which he was enjoying for the second life. The two amount to
402 tributes;" and they were adjudged to the said order, for the repair
of its buildings, etc., with the charge of paying from the amount thus
collected the amount allowed by the crown for religious purposes and
the stipends of ministers, in the same manner as other encomenderos
must. This grant was afterward extended (by decrees of September 17,
1705, and July 2, 1735); but the assignment of tributes in Cagayan
was later exchanged for another in Ilocos. The net annual proceeds
of this encomienda amount to 500 baskets of rice and 250 blankets;
"but if those who make the collections dispense with the fees through
charity, and if the aforesaid goods are conveyed to us at Manila
in the same way, these favors amount to over 100 pesos more." On
November 5, 1704, the treasury officials of Manila assigned to the
brethren of St. John an annual allowance of two arrobas of wine and
seventy-five gantas of cocoanut oil for the use of their church,
in the same manner as to the other churches of the city, with the
customary provision that royal confirmation must be obtained within
six years. This was done, but the papers were lost in shipwreck, and
the grant was therefore extended another six years. A royal decree
dated June 29, 1707 (evidently a misprint for 1717), ordered the
treasury officials at Manila to pay the hospital order annually the
value of the said oil and wine; this was received at Manila in 1718,
and from that time the brethren of St. John were paid from the treasury
fifty-nine pesos three reals a year. Governor Zabalburu allotted to
the hospital the services of twelve men from the "reserve," a form
of personal service which is thus described:]

This grant, which is called Reserva, and among the natives is
distinguished by the name of Polo, takes substantially this form: The
natives, or Indians of the four provinces which are next to Manila,
are under this impost (besides the tributes which they pay to the
king), that their laboring men must render service, at the tasks
assigned to them, for the time of one month in each year. By this
measure are furnished [the men for] the timber-cutting, shipbuilding,
and other royal works. To this end, [the names of] all stand in a
very detailed enumeration, each being numbered for the alternation
[in such service] which belongs to each one, and the apportionment,
which is made according to the number of laborers which each village
has. From this levy no one can escape, or excuse himself; for their
mandons, or headmen, even when they find the laborers hindered by other
occupations compel them, since any deficiency affects the service of
the king, to pay for other men to act as substitutes in place of those
who obtain excuses. This is all the harder because the substitutes
do not content themselves with the wages which are assigned to them
in the occupation itself, but collect three pesos besides, at which
amount the bonus is settled (unless those who manage the business have
somewhat more for their share) ; and it is an established custom that
this bonus is shared by those whom their turn exempts. Request is being
made to the authorities that for the churches and other unavoidable
needs men be granted for service, to the number stated, [but] with
exemption from these oppressive circumstances; and that, as a just
concession, the warrant for this be issued, in which is stated the
number [of men] and the village from which they are assigned to this
[service, which] is distinguished by the title "reserve." As a fact,
those who have to render this service remain exempt from the turn and
apportionment [of service] of which mention has already been made,
without any obligation to furnish a substitute, or to pay for others
to serve. With this, and with the wages which are paid to them for
their labor, we succeed in obtaining people to assist us.

By other grants, also from this government, there have been
allowed to us fifty "reserve" vagrants, in order that our ranch
may be cultivated. This is different [from the other], because the
distinctive vagrant is understood as not having a fixed residence,
and not being included in the enumerations of the men liable to polo;
but they burden the lists on account of tribute in double pay. These
men are governed by certain officers, who also impose upon them various
works for the royal service; but those who by means of these "reserves"
reside on ranches remain exempt, and therefore are occupied in the
cultivation of the grainfields. From this it results that there are
laborers for gathering the harvests, the commonwealth is furnished
with provisions, those men gain the means for their support, and our
estates are not lost to us by lying untilled.

Allowance for the dispensary.--By this superior government, and in an
ordinance of September 27, 1709, fifty pesos were applied every year in
medicines for the medical treatment of the sick in our hospitals; and,
the expenses of the royal dispensary having been permanently charged
[on the treasury] from the year 1717, Bachelor Don Miguel de la Torre,
a physician of this city, besides the known saving of expense which
he made easy for his Majesty in this respect, made the offer to
increase the allowance for medicines to a hundred pesos, which was
not [formally] assigned, and remains verbal. This he has fulfilled,
but so liberally that without any limitation all the medicines which
have been necessary for the treatment of the sick have been furnished
to us; and our order, always mindful of this kindness, recognizes
the aforesaid Don Miguel de la Torre as one of its special benefactors.

These are the grants and allowances which this province at present
enjoys, and, most grateful therefor, in all the spiritual exercises we
ask and implore the exaltation of our pious king, a munificent patron,
and we make such return as is possible in our estate of poverty. For,
although in the royal hospital the soldiers receive treatment, this
provision is not extended to their children and wives, or to the
mariners of Cabite when sickness prevents their passage [from that
place to Manila]; but all these find succor in our infirmaries, where
they are aided with the comforts which are permitted by the scanty
donations which we obtain. And although we know well how little merit
there is in our labors, as being the proper function of our Institute,
we nevertheless take comfort in this, that in the large number of
those who in these islands are maintained at the royal expense, we
cost the royal treasury least; nor do we count in this the cost of
transportation, or other extraordinary expenses (of which thus far
we have had no benefit [from the crown]); for, as has been stated in
the proper place, this humble province has always maintained itself
by asking for alms.





CHAPTER XVI


[Herein are enumerated the charitable foundations (obras pias)
[41] placed at the disposal of the Misericordia or of the brethren
of St. John. The earliest of these (although its date is not given)
appears to be that of General Thomàs Garcia de Cardenas; he gave the
Misericordia 12,000 pesos, of which 6,000 should be invested in the
Acapulco trade, and the profits applied to different charities--among
them, 100 pesos being given to the hospital, which sum is still
received by that institution whenever the Acapulco galleons make
successful voyages. Another and similar one was founded by Governor
Manuel de Leon, with 50,000 pesos of principal; from the returns
of this, 400 pesos were to be applied "for the care and comfort of
the sick in our hospitals." Master-of-camp Thomàs de Endaya in 1703
gave 8,000 pesos to the Misericordia, one-half to be invested in the
Acapulco trade for the benefit of various charities; among these,
the hospital was to receive 100 pesos for purchasing rice for the
sick. Abbot Juan Bautista Sidot (by other writers written Sidoti)
in 1705 collected among the citizens of Manila 12,000 pesos, which
he invested in trade--one-third each in Nueva España, China, and the
coast of Yaba (i.e., Java)--the returns on all these being held and
added to the principal until they should be equal to 40,000 pesos,
which sum was to be invested in the same manner, and its proceeds
devoted to various charities. Of these, the hospital was to receive
240 pesos annually, thus: 100 pesos for the salary of a physician,
100 for the cost of the dispensary, and 40 for the salary of a
surgeon. The further sum of 1,100 pesos a year afterward was assigned
to the hospital, since some of Sidoti's plans for aiding other
works proved abortive. A fund of 50,000 pesos, similarly invested
in the Acapulco trade, was given in 1706 by Fray Andrès Gonzalez,
O.P., bishop of Nueva Cazeres, from which 400 pesos a year were to
be given to the hospital; he also made provision for distributing
every year certain sums to the curas and missionary fathers in his
diocese, to be spent in aiding the sick poor in their charge--"for
the reason that, having asked permission from the royal Audiencia
of Manila to found a hospital in this city of Nueva Cazeres and
this not having been granted me, I desire that, since there is no
actual hospital, there shall be one in substance." From this wording
Maldonado argues that, in case a hospital should be founded there,
the fund left by Gonzalez for his diocese--1,305 pesos, presumably for
each year--might properly be claimed for the aid of such institution;
"with the said contribution, and if the natives of the said province
would agree to give [each] a ganta of rice or of oil, or some other
little offering of that sort, a hospital could be supported which was
suitable for aiding the many necessities which those helpless people
suffer." Sargento-mayor Don Antonio Basarte, a citizen of Manila,
established another foundation for the Misericordia in 1708; he left
50,000 pesos for this, but after the claims of his legal creditors
were satisfied, only 9,849 pesos remained; this was duly invested,
but the proceeds did not reach the amount of the original 50,000
pesos until 1726, at which time the returns became available for
charitable uses; among these, 250 pesos were allotted for the meat
necessary for the support of the sick in the hospitals. Captain Manuel
Martinez Lobo left a bequest to the Misericordia; [42] in 1727 this
yielded the net sum of 3,300 pesos, which was invested in the trade of
Acapulco and Yaba; from the proceeds the officers of the Misericordia
were to apply 50 pesos annually for the poor of the hospital, at the
time when they should make their yearly visitation of that house. In
1727 General Don Joseph de Morales (then steward of the Misericordia)
gave 600 pesos to be invested in trade, from the profits of which 100
pesos annually were to be given for comforts for the sick poor in the
hospitals. The same officer at dying left a bequest for charities,
in which were included the brethren of St. John; they were to receive
(presumably from the returns made on each galleon) 100 pesos for
buying shrouds for the sick who should die in the hospitals, 100 for
clothing for the religious, and 100 for certain religious functions to
be celebrated in their church. Morales's successor as steward, General
Don Domingo Antonio de Otero Vermudes (who was also chief alguazil
[43] of the Inquisition), in 1729 founded an obra pia with 3,000
pesos; from its returns 100 pesos were to be applied for the support
of the poor sick in the hospital. Doña Maria Joachina, the unmarried
daughter of Sargento-mayor Don Juan Antonio Collantes y Peredo, having
property in her own right, left 4,000 pesos for charitable purposes,
which included the payment of 500 pesos yearly for the convalescents
from the hospital; this became available in 1736. Licentiate Manuel
Suarez de Olivera and Doña Maria Gomez del Castillo (his wife?) left
some real estate, on which shops were located, at the place called
Los Arroceros (i.e., "the rice-mills"), outside the city walls; its
proceeds were to be given in equal shares to the hospital and to the
poor who were confined in the prisons. The aforesaid shops "fell into
decay, and were rebuilt in 1714, with the stipulation that from the
rent of them should be deducted the third part in order to repay the
amount spent for that construction;" this was accomplished in 1722,
after which the full amount was received by the beneficiaries. It is
estimated that this aid amounts to over 150 pesos a year, and its value
is greater or less according to whether the shops are all occupied;
but "we receive only what is handed over by the deputy steward of the
prisoners," to whom the collection of these rents had been entrusted
by the Misericordia. Antonio de Arisiga placed 4,000 pesos at interest,
for the aid of various charities; from the income of this he applied 50
pesos annually for the comfort of the sick in the hospital; but in the
course of time this foundation was impaired by various losses, and the
Misericordia divided its income pro rata among its beneficiaries. Juan
de Moxica placed at interest 6,750 pesos, from the income of which
should be given twelve reals for three masses every week, and the rest
for the hospital and treasury of the Misericordia; this income also
became diminished, like the preceding one, and what was collected was
applied to the aforesaid masses--although, in Maldonado's opinion,
any money in excess of Moxica's requirement ought to be applied in
equal parts to the hospital and the Misericordia.]

[All the foregoing funds are administered and controlled by the board
of the Misericordia; but the hospital has the benefit of certain
others in the hands of the Third Order of St. Francis. Don Manuel San
Juan de Santacruz established a fund in that order, for investment
in the Acapulco trade; the income was applied to various charities,
among which the hospital was to receive 100 pesos a year. In 1711
a similar fund was given by Sargento-mayor Don Diego Thomàs de
Gorostiaga, also in the Acapulco trade; from its income, the hospital
was assigned 100 pesos a year. In 1721, another fund was established
by Sargento-mayor Don Juan Lopez, on similar terms, the hospital
receiving from the income 50 pesos a year. A like foundation from
Don Jacome Maria Balestra, made in 1724, brought to the hospital
120 pesos annually. In the same year and in like manner, another
fund was given by the licentiate Don Gabriel de Isturis, which added
to the hospital's income 150 pesos a year. In 1728, an obra pia was
established in the Third Order by some unknown donor, under the title
of San Raphael; from this 80 pesos were given, half to the convent of
St. John, and half to the hospital. A year later, a similar fund was
established under the title of San Miguel, by Captain Don Miguel de
Caraza; among its beneficiaries, the sick of the hospital received,
for their food on certain holy days, 25 pesos a year. All those named
in this paragraph were administered by the said Third Order.]

[Certain funds were established by benevolent women for charitable
purposes, to be at the disposal of our writer, Maldonado. "Doña
Margarita Luysa de Avila, who was the widow of Sargento-mayor Don
Nicolàs de Rivera, from the residue of her property set aside a
principal of 700 pesos for the establishment of a charitable fund,
which should be invested by halves in the trade of Nueva España;"
to this Maldonado added 1,000 pesos more, given to him by various
other benefactors, and invested the whole thus, until its product
should bring the fund to a total of 3,362 pesos; it was then to
be divided into three parts, and again invested, its income being
thus apportioned: "130 pesos, as the offering for 156 masses, which
are celebrated in the church of our convent at Manila, three on
each Monday in the year--one with an offering of one peso, and the
others with one of six reals each; beginning after half-past six in
the morning, and not before, nor shall they be said at one time--as
suffrages for the souls in purgatory; and this stipend can be applied
to the fathers belonging to this community who are priests. Thirty
pesos, in order that the reverend father who is prior or superior
of this convent may arrange for chanting a solemn mass with vigils,
and with the assistance of the community, on one of the days in the
octave of the dead, in the month of November, the suffrages being
applied in behalf of the founders. One hundred and fifty pesos,
in order that the reverend father who may be prior or superior of
this convent may distribute this sum, as is stated in the foundation
of the said fund, for the expenses at the feast of the gozos [44]
of the blessed ever-virgin Mary, our Lady; these must be celebrated
in our church as a seven days' feast, which begins on the day of the
patronage of the blessed St. Joseph, who is honored as the father of
Jesus Christ our Lord--that is, the third Sunday after Easter. Sixty
pesos for the offering for eighty masses to be said, with the stipend
of six reals each, which the reverend father who is or shall be the
prior or superior of this convent is to arrange for being celebrated
during the said septenary--fourteen on the first day, and eleven on
each of the other days, and inviting for this function priests by
whom it can be completed, since this community has not a sufficient
number of priests therefor--in order to fulfil this obligation in the
manner which is prescribed, and the intention of [the founders; the]
said masses must be applied as suffrages for the souls in purgatory,
and for those of the founders. Twenty-five pesos, to be distributed
during the said septenary among the poor, both men and women, who may
be in our infirmaries. Twelve pesos, to be divided as alms among the
women servants of the infirmary for women in our hospital. Twenty-eight
pesos, to be divided, on the first day of the said septenary, among
fourteen Spanish widows, at the rate of two pesos each. Fourteen pesos,
for the cost of wine for masses, so much as is deemed necessary for
the celebration of those which are mentioned in this foundation. Forty
pesos, which must be kept in reserve every year for the repairs on
our convent of Manila, according to occasion. This foundation began to
operate in the year 1738, and would be in condition for distribution
if it were not for the loss of a galleon and another misfortune,
which retarded the distribution until the year 1745; and request
has been made that its administration be entrusted to the venerable
arch-confraternity of the Blessed Sacrament that is established in
the church of San Gabriel at Bin[on]doc, a mission village in charge
of the holy Order of St. Dominic, outside the walls of this city."]

[Another fund in Maldonado's hands is that which "Doña Josepha Ortega,
who was the wife of General Don Antonio Sanchez Cerdàn, set aside from
the main part of her estate, the sum of 2,500 pesos as a principal,
in order that a charitable fund might be established, at the disposal
of the religious who writes this. According to the instructions
communicated to him by the said foundress, the said principal must
be invested in the trade with Nueva España, its product accruing to
it until the fund should reach the amount of 7,818 pesos 3 reals;
in that case it should be divided into three parts, each of 2,600
pesos 1 real, with which principal the investment should be continued
in the said trade with Nueva España; and the income of this fund,
usually amounting to 1,042 pesos, be distributed in this manner:
Ninety-two pesos for the offering for that number of masses in the
chapel of the ward [used as an] infirmary for women in this hospital
of Manila. Twenty-five pesos for the expenses of the function of
[the Virgin's] Solitude, which is solemnized in our church on the
night of Good Friday in each year. Eighty pesos for the offering for
as many masses, which are to be solemnized in our church during the
septenary of the most glorious patriarch St. Joseph, at the feast of
his gozos, which begins on the fifteenth day of October. Twenty-five
pesos for the redemption of captives. Thirty-six pesos, to be divided,
during the said septenary, among the sick poor, both men and women,
in our hospital of Manila. Twelve pesos, to be divided, during the
said septenary, among the women servants of the sick-ward for women
in this hospital. One hundred pesos, to be distributed, during the
said septenary, by the superior of this convent and one of the father
chaplains, among deserving poor widows and orphan girls, especially
those who are present in our church at the said festivity. Thirteen
pesos, for the same purpose, among the poor beggars who are present in
our church at the said festivity. Twenty-five pesos, for a hundred
bulls for the living; these will be given as alms by the fathers
who assist in the confessionals in our church during the said
septenary, and who can ascertain the poor who are in need of this
favor. Twenty-five pesos, for the alms of a hundred bulls for the
departed, [to be given] on the day when their memory is celebrated in
our church in the month of November, the suffrage being applied for
those who shall have died in our hospital. Sixty-four pesos one real,
for the function of masses, vigils, and responses for the cemetery,
which has been established in our church as a suffrage for the dead,
in the month of November of each year. Twenty-five pesos, for the
holy places of Jerusalem. One hundred and fifty pesos for the cost of
chocolate, [45] with which sum arrangements are made to furnish it to
the religious of this convent of Manila. One hundred pesos, which are
to be reserved each year for the material fabrica of our convent and
hospital of Manila, as occasion may require. One hundred pesos for the
expenses of the arch-confraternity of the Blessed Sacrament at Binondo,
which has been asked to take charge of the administration of this
fund. And 134 pesos one real, in order that this sum may be separately
invested, and with its accrued products form another foundation,
until it shall contain 1,717 pesos one real as principal; and then,
divided into three parts, it may be ventured in the galleons of the
Nueva España route, and with its returns the following assignments
be made: 300 pesos for two dowries, of 150 pesos each, to fatherless
girls, the daughters of Spaniards, of virtuous lives--which dowries
are to be allotted on one of the days of the septenary, in the manner
which will be explained. Forty pesos for the Christmas masses [missas
de Aguinaldo] which are celebrated in our church of this convent
of Manila. Eleven pesos, for the expenses of the entertainment
which must be given to those who meet in the committee which must
be called together for the choice of the orphans to whom are to be
allotted the dowries aforesaid, during the septenary of St. Joseph,
the arrangements for which in detail are punctually set down here. In
order that embarrassments arising from personal considerations which
intervene may be avoided, heed must be taken in the award of these
dowries that the names be presented of those who are needy; and,
this having been ascertained by a special conference which the father
who is or shall be the superior of this convent shall have with the
father priests--and if there are not two, he shall substitute the
chief councilor--it shall be declared by the majority of votes who
ought by right to be admitted from the persons who make claims; and,
this settled, the choice shall be made among those who shall be thus
accepted, by drawing lots, and the two dowries shall be awarded to
the girls who shall draw the fortunate lots. The method of the said
drawing shall be, that the names of all those who are accepted shall be
written, each on a slip of paper; and an equal number of other slips,
blank, shall be made, and on two of these shall be written the words,
'May I be endowed by the glorious St. Joseph.' Then in one urn,
or other suitable receptacle, shall be placed the slips, folded,
on which are written the names of the candidates; and in another urn
or receptacle like the other shall be placed the blank slips--which,
as already stated, shall be equal in number to those containing the
names, and shall include those on which was written the fortunate lot,
as has been explained--and both urns shall be shaken. [This shall
be done] in the afternoon of the first day of the septenary; in the
body of the church shall be placed a table with a neat cover, and
some chairs, where the superior [of the Order of St. John] shall sit
as president, accompanied by the priestly fathers who may belong to
it; in case there should be no more than one [of these], the chief
councilor shall assist him. With the aid of the father councilor,
a slip shall be drawn from [the urn containing] the names, and read,
and then another shall be drawn from those that are blank, the writing
on the slips being read aloud, and recorded on a paper which the
said secretary shall keep by him; after this manner the other slips
shall be successively drawn, until from the names those are chosen
which the lot shall indicate; and, as it follows that there will be
present in the church at this function the parties who are concerned,
or some one who can act in their behalf, such person shall be summoned,
and the order for payment handed to her, so that she may obtain her
donation of 150 pesos for dowry. And for the orderly management of this
business there shall be made a book of common paper, in which shall
be written the [names and proceedings of the] special committee which
shall be called together to investigate the claims; and they shall
endeavor, before the choice is made, to gain accurate information,
in order that the appointment may be confirmed in accordance with the
intention of the said foundation. At the said committee-meeting the
[claims of the] parties shall be presented, and especially of those
admitted to the drawing, without any opinion being expressed regarding
those who shall not be admitted, or any previous information regarding
the decision being given to the parties concerned. Those admitted to
the drawing shall be notified to come together on the day prescribed,
and on the same day these regulations shall be read, when the superior
shall have reported that he has carried out all their provisions, as
appears from the book of the committee; and the other arrangements that
are made for the fulfilment of this charge shall be put into practice
in each successive year, the full record thereof being afterward
made in the book, with full evidence that to those who were chosen
by lot the donation that was assigned them has been paid." Maldonado
expects that the income of this foundation as a whole will be available
within six years, if no disaster be encountered; but the provision
for dowries will have to wait twelve years. He states that two things
must be considered, in estimating the value of the funds enumerated
in this chapter: first, that when they were founded the profits
on the Acapulco trade were reckoned at fifty per cent, but at the
time when he writes have diminished at the rate of forty per cent;
accordingly, the incomes of the funds have been distributed pro rata
to the various beneficiaries. Second, as these incomes depend on the
perils of the sea, they have encountered many losses from shipwrecks;
or the failure of the vessel to complete the voyage, or even to obtain
a cargo at Manila; or the delay in receiving the returns from Acapulco,
caused by an unsuccessful fair there, or by other embarrassments.]




[THE OTHER HOSPITALS IN THE ISLANDS]

[This matter is found at the end of chapter ii of Maldonado's book
(pp. 25-29), but is transferred to this place as being more appropriate
in orderly sequence; he describes the condition of those institutions
at the time of writing his book.]



Present condition of the royal hospital of Manila

The new royal hospital being reestablished, and all the expenses
necessary for its maintenance being provided for in the royal treasury,
for its business management and the assistance of the sick there
were allotted a steward, a physician, a surgeon, nurses, and the
other servants who were deemed necessary; and for its spiritual
administration the discalced religious of the holy order of our
holy father St. Francis, in the province of San Gregorio of these
islands--which arrangement was approved by a royal decree, dated
at Madrid, May 20, 1624. It has continued in this manner up to the
present century, when, on account of the lack of religious for the
Indian villages dependent on the Franciscans, and other just reasons,
they were released from the ministry of the said royal hospital,
and the government appointed secular priests as chaplains, with a
suitable income. The cost of maintaining the hospital in its present
condition is reckoned at 6,841 pesos, thus: The chaplain, steward,
and physician, at 300 pesos each; the surgeon, 240; [46] the chief
sacristan, three nurses, one assistant surgeon, the keeper of the
wardrobe, the cook, and the doorkeeper, each 96 pesos; with this
the ordinary expense, 1,368 pesos. [It also requires] 960 cabans of
rice, 384 gantas of cocoanut-oil, and 8,400 fowls; also 2,000 pesos,
at which amount the provision for medicines is permanently fixed, and
215 pesos besides, which sum is allotted for the cost of wine for mass,
wax, and other expenses which are incurred for the titular feast day,
which is All Saints' day. Interments are made in the royal chapel
of this garrison, which also has for the year's expenses 3,220 pesos
more, without counting the extraordinary expenses which are necessary
during that time in the hospital, for beds, tents, and other needs,
and in the royal chapel for ornaments and the other requirements of the
divine worship. In the said royal hospital, without a special order
from the superior government no other persons are received, whatever
their rank may be, besides the officers and soldiers who are in actual
service; and, although some mariners resort to this institution--and
these are few, on account of the distance of their residence, which
is in Cabite--it has not, either, a ward for women. The steward,
the chaplain, and the chief sacristan (who usually is a priest) have
their residence in the said hospital, and are continually on duty. The
physician and the surgeons are present both afternoon and morning,
to visit the sick and give prescriptions for what seems necessary. The
nurses and the other servants lack the intelligence which is required
[in such work], for those who are occupied in it are poor persons,
who have no other situations; and, as the employment is arduous, they
do not remain long in it. Several high officials, in discussing this
matter, have showed their preference that this responsibility should
devolve upon our religious. It is certain that the object of that same
institution calls for different service, and might also excuse some
[further] expense to his Majesty; but as this depends upon the royal
command, it has not proceeded beyond mere talk.

The hospital of our religious order--of which mention will be made
further on, as not limited to a special class--is a general one,
for men and women of all classes; and in this same holy exercise of
their ministry is secured the relief and general consolation of the
needy who resort to this charity.



Hospital of San Lazaro

Without the walls of Manila is another hospital, with the name of
San Lazaro, in which are gathered all those who are stricken by the
contagious disease of the same name; it is administered and cared
for by the religious of our holy father St. Francis, and his Majesty
has assigned to it, by virtue of a royal decree of January 22, 1672,
a contribution of 1,187 pesos 4 reals every year--500 pesos in cash,
paid from the royal treasury; the rest is the estimated value of
1,500 cabans of rice, 1,500 fowls, 200 light Ilocos blankets, and
one arroba of Castilian wine for the holy sacrifice of mass.



Hospital of San Gabriel for the Sangleys

There is also another hospital outside the walls; it is under the
protection of St. Gabriel, and in the charge and administration of
the religious in the venerable Order of Preachers of the province of
the Santissimo Rosario of these islands; it is designed solely for
medical treatment for the Chinese (or Sangleys) who reside in this
country. For its maintenance at the beginning, there was assigned
to it by his Majesty the ferry across the great river which flows
between the said hospital and this city; but this allowance ceased
at the building of the great bridge which afterward was constructed,
and by royal decree of November 26, 1630, the said allowance was
commuted to the sum of 2,000 pesos each year, which is paid from the
communal chest [47] which the Sangleys themselves maintain.




Hospital of Los Baños

In the village of Los Baños, in the jurisdiction of the province of La
Laguna, which is distant five leguas from Manila, was founded another
hospital at the account of his Majesty; it was for the convalescent
soldiers, on account of the specific properties of the waters of
that district, particularly for venereal diseases [Galicos]. But the
institution has been steadily declining with the course of time, and
at present there remains only one religious from the holy order of
our holy father St. Francis, who is assisted from the royal exchequer
with 120 pesos a year.



[Royal] allowances for infirmaries

In virtue of a royal decree of September 4, 1667, every year are issued
[treasury] warrants for 300 baskets [sextos; apparently misprint
for cestos] of rict and 200 fowls for the infirmary which the holy
Order of St. Dominic maintains in the convent at the village of Lalo,
the chief town of the province of Cagayan. By another royal decree,
dated January 18, 1706, there are also issued to the holy order of
our holy father St. Francis 100 pesos for medicines, and the value of
129 pesos in various commodities, and 800 fowls, for the infirmaries
which it maintains in this city, [in] Pagsanhan, the chief town of the
province of La Laguna, and [in] Naga, the chief town of the province
of Camarines. It is understood, however, that this aid is only for the
treatment of the sick religious belonging to the said holy communities.




Hospital of Zamboanga

In the fortified town of Samboanga is maintained a dwelling for the
sick soldiers, who are assisted by a practitioner with the title of
surgeon; for this occupation he is paid four pesos four reals monthly,
and for the treatment of the sick a chest of medicines is sent from
Manila every year. The lack of skill on the part of this practitioner
or surgeon, and, moreover, the fact that less provision is made for
the entire amount of assistance [there given] than the hospital
order requires, enable one to see what the men in garrison there
will suffer. But it is inferred that those are in worse condition
who serve in the garrisons of the fortifications of Nuestra Señora
del Rosario in Iloylo, San Pedro in Zebù, Santa Isabèl of Paragua
in Calamianes, San Francisco in Cagayan, and San Joseph of Tanda in
Caraga--not to mention many other posts that are dependent on these
principal fortresses--where there is no attendance of surgeons,
and no medicines are sent thither. Our community, knowing this,
shares in their affliction, by not being able to aid them for lack
of the permissions from superiors and the adequate assistance which
were indispensable for the proper care of the soldiers.



[The book ends with another chapter, headed "Digression xvii,"
which contains an apology for the deficiencies of the work, and an
account of two miraculous interventions (by their founder St. John
and by an image of the Virgin) at their convent in July, 1739. On
the former subject he says: "I avoid repetition of the reasons for
the lack of elegant style and exactness of terms, and will conclude
by saying that various other deficiencies that may be encountered are
irreparable; for these natives who serve as amanuenses are so averse
to all orthography that even the greatest exactness in pointing out
their errors, in work of this sort, cannot prevent them from making
mistakes. Some words they separate [from those] to which these belong,
and others they do not divide; they write proper names with a small
[initial] letter, and place capitals in the midst of any word;
sometimes they set down the words without the least understanding
of the punctuation. On this account it is necessary that the reader
discreetly supply what [deficiencies] of this sort he may notice;
and if this [manuscript] be transcribed for any purpose, that it be
corrected beforehand--for this effort has already been made, but has
not been sufficient; nor would it be, even if the manuscript were
copied over and over, for what is thus made correct in one place is
compensated by a new error in another place." He ends with the usual
protestation of loyalty to the doctrines and precedents of the church,
dated at Manila, July 10, 1740.]








LETTER TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE INDIA COUNCIL


I wrote last year to your most illustrious Lordship, by way of Nueva
España and Portugal, mentioning the pleasure which I felt at the
news that your most illustrious Lordship held the presidency of the
Council of the Indias; for besides the affection which I profess to
your most illustrious Lordship, ever since I experienced your kindness
in Balladolid, I have looked for the like success in the management
of the important affairs which are entrusted to the Council, and I
hope that these unfortunate and remote regions may have a share in
the good results which their government needs.

In regard to the troubles which have afflicted this commonwealth:
The Dutch, keen to avail themselves of opportunities to extend their
commerce, sent hither a warship in the year forty-four, under pretext
of an embassy; it was in charge of Monsieur Duvins, the second factor
in their trade with Japon. He carried letters from the governor and
council of Batavia for the governor and Audiencia here, in which it was
stated that he came to look for a bark named "Cathalina Magdalena"--for
which a Swiss heretic had given pledges to the Company at Batavia with
his own person; it had sailed from here with the name "Sancta Ana," and
a commission from the governor here; but it was sold to the Company,
who changed its name, and in the charge of the same Swiss it came back
here to trade, with consignments belonging to the Dutch. And since, in
order to send the squadron to China, [48] the departure of the vessels
which were in this bay was prohibited, the said bark was compelled to
winter here; and, under pretext of looking after these [commercial]
interests, the Dutch sent their envoy with credentials. He carried
himself, while here, with the air of an ambassador, and claimed that
we should treat him as such, that we should give him audience in a
session of the royal court, and that the auditors should visit him;
but in polite terms he was given to understand that without express
order from his Majesty he could not be treated as he desired; and it
was resolved that answer should be made to the letters with entire
courtesy--stating that no such bark as the "Cathalina Magdalena" had
landed at these islands; but that, if through stress of any storm it
should enter our ports, it should receive succor, and our friendly
relations would be maintained in all things. His principal topic,
however, was that free trade should be permitted to him here, and that
the Dutch should bring us all the merchandise necessary for us. But,
as he found no opening for a proposition of that sort--on account of
the prohibition [of commerce] in the laws [of the kingdoms] and in
the treaties of peace, and because of the damage which would ensue to
the islands from admitting within them the different religion which
neighbors so cunning and so powerful [as the Dutch] would undertake
to impart to them--he returned home much disgusted, publishing to the
Dutch that Manila could be captured with five hundred soldiers, and
even urging this enterprise as an easy one on Barnet, the commander
of the English squadron which was then at Batavia.

The Dutch, not discomfited by this repulse, or by the loss of 50,000
pardaos [49] (which are 37,500 pesos)--which as they write from
Batavia, the above-mentioned ambassador expended--made an agreement
with an English corsair who was at Batavia, with a ship of fifty-two
guns and another of thirty, to the effect that under his own flag
he should escort four Dutch ships, which they despatched to Acapulco
last year with merchandise. And in order to hinder the galleon from
leaving this port they deceived a Frenchman, [50] who was very well
known here, hinting to him that the squadron of Barenet [sic] and the
corsair were going to attack Manila; and they hastened his embarkation,
at the cost of 4,000 pesos, in order that he might notify us here. Then
they gave orders to the corsair, with two other ships of their own,
to let themselves be seen at the entrance of Mariveles, in order to
throw Manila into alarm and hinder the sailing of the galleon. By
[causing] this fright they succeeded in their purpose to prevent the
sailing of the ship, which was lightened of its cargo as soon as the
information which the Frenchman gave reached us; and the 4,000 pesos
were paid [to him] for the cost of this warning. The said four ships
sailed to leeward, and sighted the coast of Ylocos, whence we had
news of this. But they could not attain their principal object; for
when the six ships had come together in China, and were laden with
[goods worth] 900,000 pardaos (each containing six silver reals),
they expected the vessel which, after having given that warning
here, was to cross over to China [51] and carry to the Dutch a pilot
for the navigation to Nueva España; but it could not reach China,
and was obliged to go to Batavia. The four Dutch ships and the two
[English] corsairs, resolved to carry out their project, sailed from
Canton on the fourteenth of September, bound for the coast of Nueva
España and Perú to carry on illicit trade, [52] and the English to
make reprisals. But God, who chose to punish so mischievous a design,
permitted that a hurricane should attack them, when they were four days
out from Canton; and as a result the two corsairs were driven back to
China--the larger vessel dismasted and battered, and the smaller one
badly damaged. The four Dutch ships, badly leaking, spent twelve days
in searching for an anchorage on the coast of Ylocos, in order to make
repairs; but not finding one, they went back to Batavia, with their
goods damaged. According to what is written to us in a despatch that
is just received from Batavia--from a person who was sent there from
here to make observations on the condition of the English piratical
squadron--the Dutch lost on their merchandise half of its value; and
the corsair sold for 17,000 pardaos his ship of fifty-two guns, with
all its military supplies, since it was no longer fit for navigation,
while he went with the other and smaller ship--it is said without
[stopping for] food--to another port to repair it. [It is also
reported] that the squadron of Barenet had departed for Bombain,
toward the Persian Gulf, to cruise against the French, from whom
he seized at the Straits [of Malacca] nearly a million pesos. The
person who was sent from here to Batavia (who is a Malabar) with a
balandra was detained there under the pretext that the governor had
gone away, and orders were given that he should not be permitted to
depart until the governor's return. But he informed us of everything,
by a vessel which he despatched with six men and a French pilot; and
he reported that three Dutch fragatas were being equipped and laden
with merchandise in order to carry on illicit trade at the entrance
of [the Gulf of] Californias, carrying [respectively] forty, thirty,
and twenty-five cannon. In his opinion, this was the cause of his
detention, in order that, by news [from him] not reaching Manila,
the galleon should not sail for Nueva España, and their intention
not be known here.

On account of all these advices, and those which we had previously
received by way of China making the same statement about the English,
it was resolved here that, since the chief [cause for] fear, which was
the said squadron--which occasioned the letter with order from the
Marqués de la Enseñada, [53] to give warning that a ship should not
sail from here with cargo--had ceased, and since the commonwealth was
in the most deplorable extremity, with a shipment of goods which had
been driven back to port, and laden and unladen the second time, and
in evident risk of being lost, a final effort was made by dividing the
cargo between two ships equipped for war. One of these carried seventy
cannon and the other fifty-two (seventy and forty [respectively]
being mounted), and a corresponding number of men, resolved to defend
their property and with sufficient force to make resistance to the
entire squadron of Barenet, whose ships carried fifty-two, forty-five,
forty, and thirty cannon. For the cost of this enterprise the body
of merchants offered to aid with 50,000 pesos in Acapulco; and this
effort seemed necessary, for, as the viceroy of Mexico had orders
not to allow any money to come here, he understood them so strictly
that last year he sent a bark [54] without one real. Nevertheless,
he was not ignorant that the situado had not been sent here for three
years: that with this, and the failure of the [Acapulco] trade, the
treasury of the islands ran short 60,000 pesos each year in customs
and anchorage duties; that the citizens would necessarily be reduced
to poverty, and that these domains were utterly helpless; and that
by despatching the aid in November it would arrive here in entire
safety from the English--who only through general lack of military
foresight were able to secure the prize which they made; for these
islands have various ports where our ships can land (thus mocking
the enemy), as occurred in the late war; but when they come by the
ordinary route and the artillery is in the hold, no other result
[than their capture] can be expected.

The damage, most illustrious Sir, is already done, but it calls to
heaven for a remedy for the future. That which I propose is, that,
since [the merchandise for] this commerce was formerly supplied,
either by sending our barks to the Malabar coast, or by Armenians,
Moros, or Malabars coming thence with their ships and goods--only
tolerating that they might bring some French pilot--orders be
given to observe this plan so strictly that warning be given to the
Audiencia, the archbishop, and the city [of Manila] that they shall
give information if the governor shall contravene those orders, and
some exemplary punishment be meted out. For the despotic power which
the governors, under pretext of their services, have assumed is great;
and the freedom which they have given to the English and the French
[55] has arrived at being general license. From this prohibition it
follows that they cannot gain so much knowledge about the country
and its forts, and that they cannot so greatly injure this commerce,
[as hitherto]; for the Asiatics are never so shrewd as the Europeans,
and their only concern is for their business, without meddling in
observations of our forts or our forlorn condition. To this remedy
I add that which I have proposed to the Council, and which on this
occasion I repeat.

Observing the aforesaid freedom, the Dutch have ventured to come
[against us] with the ease which the Swiss heretic had represented
to them; and if this Swiss had not been allowed to come here with
his bark, he would not have involved us in such difficulties with
the Dutch, for they, in pique, undertook to introduce their commerce
into Nueva España--tempting the viceroy with 300,000 pesos which they
carried thither last year, planning to give him this money so that
he should tolerate [their trading]. And since they are now returning
I fear that they are planning to occupy some port in California,
[56] in order that it may serve them as a magazine--like the island
of Curazas [i.e., Curacoa] in the North Sea--and to make arrangements
for carrying on their commerce from Batavia with the same ease as from
here. And in order to prevent these or others from undertaking such a
scheme (which would be the destruction of America), I have collected
testimony regarding all which can aid the Council to realize how,
without any expense to the royal treasury, and with the men of whom
we have here more than enough belonging to the navy-yard and ships,
[Manila] can be fortified for that part of America, for the security
of both these and those domains; but I hope for the success of the
former proposition, in order not to pile up schemes. I assure your
most illustrious Lordship that this can be pushed forward in a way
which will be very useful to the nation; because, in order to keep
the Dutch under control, it is enough that they know that we keep
in readiness the three galleons each of seventy cannon, which the
commerce ought to have, and four fragatas besides, with which we can
disturb the commerce of the Straits for the inland regions. This is
especially easy to do with the English, because, even though they send
squadrons from Europa, many of their men die, and they use up their men
as fast as they gain ground; and in this country they can never do us
harm if we do not give way [to negligence], as hitherto [we have done].

I hope that your most illustrious Lordship will pardon the annoyance
of this, as springing from my zeal [57] for the service of the king
and the welfare of the nation; and I confide in the inborn devotion
[thereto] of your most illustrious Lordship, whose life I entreat
God our Lord to preserve for the many years which I desire and
need. Manila, July 16, 1746. Most illustrious Sir, I kiss the hands of
your most illustrious Lordship. Your most devoted and humble servant,


Pedro Calderon y Henriquez (with rubric)

[Addressed: "To the most illustrious Señor Don Joseph de Carbajal y
Lancaster, of the Council and cabinet of the Indias, and president
of the Council."]








LETTER OF A JESUIT TO HIS BROTHER


As the ships which in the years 47 and 48 sailed from here to Acapulco
were driven back to these islands, the letters which in those years
I wrote to my brother could not be despatched. This obliges me to
avail myself of a safer opportunity, that afforded by the voyage of
the father procurators, Pedro Murillo [58] and Bernardo Pazuengos,
who for many and important reasons are going to Europe by way of the
coast (that is, the Orient) in a French ship which is going from here
to France. In the letters which I wrote in past years, I informed
my brother of the enterprise of the missions in Joló and Mindanao,
in which we were involved by the governor of these islands, Fray Juan
de Arrechedera, by the hasty remittance of the letters despatched from
Don Felipe (whom may God keep) to the sultans of Joló and Mindanao, and
with his own energetic exhortations and promises to our provincial--so
that he gave no opportunity to take any counsel, or to furnish means
for avoiding the most serious difficulties. [The worst of these]
was, as we soon perceived, that at the very time when he despatched
with embassies the letters of our king to the said sultans, the
said Governor Arrechedera sent an urgent invitation to the sultan
of Joló to come to Manila, where he would be hospitably received
and entertained. We all knew that the object of the governor was,
that the sultan might bring here abundance of pearls and gold; and
we also knew that with the departure of the sultan from his kingdom
the mission would come to an end, as has actually happened. [59]
At the time we were only mistaken in one thing, and that was, to
feel sure that the fathers would not leave Joló or Mindanao; for we
reckoned that if the sultan should leave Joló the natives would kill
the fathers of that mission, and the sultan would easily justify
himself because the act had been committed in his absence, and he
could even pretend great sorrow for the deaths of the fathers; and in
Mindanao, when it was known that in Joló they had killed the fathers,
they would do the same there to those engaged in the Mindanao mission.

In reality the fathers had arrived at Zamboanga. When the Moros found
themselves obliged to receive the fathers in their kingdoms, according
to the promise which they had given in their replies to our king and
to the governor of Manila, the two sultans agreed between themselves
that after they had admitted the fathers [to their countries] they
would treacherously kill them, and so that their murder could not
be attributed to the influence of the sultans. The means which the
sultan of Joló took was, that after he left his kingdom they should
kill the fathers--although God our Lord disposed affairs otherwise
from the schemes which the sultan, with unheard-of craft and perfidy,
had plotted.

In order that my brother may be fully informed, and may correctly
relate everything to all those whom my brother may think expedient
to tell of it, I send that enclosure which Father Ygnacio Malaga
wrote to me; this account is worthy of entire credence, since he was
almost an eyewitness of everything which he relates, being one of
the missionaries appointed for Mindanao.

If what Governor Arrechedera is doing here in Manila with the sultan
of Joló could be known in Madrid and Roma, and in every other country,
people would have no difficulty in believing the enormous perfidy,
treachery, and deceit of the said sultan and other Moros. It is nearly
a year since the said sultan of Joló arrived at Manila, accompanied
by three concubines and several slave-girls. At his arrival the
artillery was discharged; and he was lodged very magnificently,
in a house provided beforehand for this purpose, outside the walls
of Manila, with a continual guard of soldiers, whose captain was
always under the orders of the sultan. The entry of the sultan into
Manila was arranged with so much pomp and ostentation that everyone
said no more could have been done for the entry of the prince of
España if he should come to Manila; but all that is told is less
[than the reality]. The governor seeing a scarf woven with pearls
and ornaments in gold, immediately his eyes and his heart went out
toward the scarf and the many other pearls and jewels which he knew
the sultan carried. At this the governor entirely closed his eyes to
all the information that was given to him--not only that furnished
by the fathers of the said missions who had come back to Manila, but
the letters which the governor of Samboanga had written to him--openly
saying that he placed more confidence in the king of Joló than in the
fathers who sent the information. What causes most general sorrow here
(and especially to the archbishop) [60] is, that on account of the
governor not being willing to listen to anything against the sultan,
that is coming true which the fathers said to his Lordship--that
the said sultan from Manila would cause the ruin of these islands,
causing the Jolóans by piratical raids to carry away many Christian
Indians as captives, and to destroy churches and villages. This is
what they are actually doing, as is written by the fathers in Visayas,
whose letters I have seen within a few days, and the governor will
not permit that a word be uttered in order that it may not be said
(although it is well known) that the Moros are destroying the island
with the gunpowder and balls which have been sent them from Manila,
and the sultan is paying for them with the pearls and gold which he
has given to the said governor. What continually renews the grief
of all is, that not only is no remedy applied to so dire evils, but
that the governor continues to entertain the sultan in Manila as if
he were our friend or defender, while he is the greatest traitor and
enemy that this Christian church has had; and we greatly fear that
by this time the said sultan is making himself master of the post at
Samboangan. [61]

It is sufficient to have pointed this out in order that my brother may
gain knowledge of the condition in which affairs are. What concerns
the mission in Mindanao is made sufficiently clear in the letter from
Father Ygnacio Malaga, and everything that he says is the simple truth;
but, in order that this truth may not be smothered with the reports
which this governor of Manila is sending to the court at Madrid, I have
sent my brother that letter of Father Malaga, entreating him to please
show it to the father procurator-general Pedro Ygnacio Altamirano,
and to any other person whom my brother may think best, for the sake
of the credit of this province and of the entire Society--for they do
not lack many rivals, who are not willing that the ill-success of the
missions of Joló and Mindanao should be attributed to the perfidy and
malice of the Moros; but they try to charge it to the very fathers
of the Society.

My brother will also please tell the father procurator Altamirano
how the father provincial Pedro de Estrada had written to inform his
Reverence that all the letters of contract on our side in favor of his
illustrious Lordship Fray Arrechedera could not be worded otherwise,
since we found ourselves obliged to this by the urgent request of the
governor himself, and he had to see all of them. But in reality the
course of the said governor cannot in conscience be approved [abonar]
except with the reflection that Father Altamirano knows very well
that our letters on this matter were being misconstrued, and that
his Reverence would not be influenced to bind himself in virtue of
them to favor the said Señor Arrechedera. In order to make this more
certain, the said father provincial Estrada wrote a letter in order
that the said Father Altamirano should not pay any attention to this
undertaking of ours; and I, as his secretary at the time of the said
father provincial, wrote the third letter, as I did all the rest.

Now it is evident to me that the archbishop of Manila is informing
his Majesty very thoroughly of the proceedings of the said governor;
and certainly it would go ill with us with the king and his Council,
if our reports should be presented in favor of the said governor,
while those which the archbishop is now sending are entirely contrary
to this. Here we are, as if in Limbo, for we have not had mails from
Europe for more than three years, except the news which came from
China and Batavia.

The father provincial Pedro de Estrada died at the end of the year
48; his office was temporarily filled by Father José Samaniego, and
in seven months he also died. God our Lord has freed these islands
from the scourge of the English, for the squadron of forty-three ships
which was destined for this coast undertook first to seize Pondicheri
and Madrás (which they thought would be an affair of a few days), and
then go on to Philipinas; but they did not capture either Pondicheri or
Madrás, and much or even the greater part of the squadron was destroyed
in a fierce storm. If they had come here, it is certain that now this
country would be in the power of the English; for all the precautions
that were taken here for our defense were festivities with the sultan
of Joló and his concubines, to the profound sorrow of the community;
etc. Cavite, December 2, 1749.


[Addressed: "To my brother Pedro, the abbot."]








COMMERCE OF THE PHILIPINAS ISLANDS,

AND ADVANTAGES WHICH THEY CAN YIELD TO HIS MAJESTY CARLOS III


To the king our sovereign Carlos III: [62]


Sire: The pressing obligation which rests upon all good vassals to
render some service which shall be profitable to their sovereigns
encourages my faint-heartedness to lay at the royal feet of your
Majesty this work, which I offer with the utmost submission, with
the assurance of my most loyal desires that your Majesty may enjoy
the most prosperous and glorious reign over these dominions. [I
am also urged on by] my own practical knowledge [of the subject],
and the demand of the entire nation, especially of the mercantile
interests--although little do they suspect that I have undertaken the
enterprise with so much energy from persuading myself that my good
fortune would gain for this act your Majesty's kindly regard, which,
coming to the knowledge of your loyal vassals, will be received with
the utmost satisfaction, and as a proof of your paternal affection
and your sincere desire for their advancement.

I entreat our Lord that He will grant you all success and prosperity,
and a long life, in order that these realms may enjoy for very many
years the felicitous rule which the nation ought to expect from the
distinguished qualifications possessed by your Majesty, from which
it hopes to become more glorious than ever.



Prologue to the Reader

Commerce is contemporaneous with human society, from whose necessities
it was born. [The author here sketches the origin and development of
commerce among civilized nations, and states how in his undertaking
this work he received the approval of the late king of Spain Fernando
VI.]



Commerce of the Philipinas Islands; the benefit and advantages which
the said islands ought to yield to his Majesty (whom may God preserve).


[This will seem] a strange statement when it is considered that the
Philipinas Islands since the year 1565 have caused to España every year
a very great expense, without affording the least temporal advantage;
and when I now try to demonstrate the advantage and benefit of them
to the crown of España some will say that it is already time to stop;
and others will ask, "Who is this newcomer [63] who so boldly tries
to persuade us that the Spaniards have neglected their duty for one
hundred and ninety-two years?" But so it is, and now is the time
to warn them of this neglect; and, although ignorance attempts to
prevent this, it shall not make me desist from the undertaking. I
desire that his Majesty (whom may God preserve) may have positive
knowledge of the treasure which he possesses in the Philipinas
Islands; and I am undertaking to place before his Majesty plain and
clear evidence that they can and ought to furnish very great profit,
and maintain themselves from their own products.

I make no pretensions as an author, nor do I claim to have the
ability for that; therefore let us lay aside panegyrics, which are
so unprofitable; for, even if this little work deserves them, that
does not comport with my purpose, which is simply the service of his
Majesty and the advancement of his realms.

As regards all that I shall be able to state of the products of
commodities which the said islands yield, in order that every one
may know that I do not advocate something that is not so, I recommend
(although various persons have written on the subject) to the curious
the two books of the reverend master Father Pedro Murillo Velarde,
of the Society of Jesus, entitled Historia de las Islas Philipinas
and Historia geografica of the same Philipinas Islands.

These are worthy of attention, and in regard to what is theoretical
can furnish much light; as for what concerns the practical, and the
experience which I have acquired at the cost of much money, labor,
and application, I must make evident all the following.

First: We must consider what commodities or products these islands
contain or produce, as well as the fact that we do not have to build
castles in the air or proceed on fanciful assumptions; all that I
assert shall be from my own knowledge.

Second: Whether the products or commodities can be used, and to
explain and demonstrate how we can avail ourselves of them; and all
that I shall say on this subject will proceed from the long experience
which I have had.

Third: The advantages and benefits which will redound to his Majesty,
to the Spaniards settled in those regions, and to the Indians
themselves.

The first point: As the products of the Philipinas Islands are
enumerated by the reverend Father Murillo (whom may God keep in
Paradise), whom I have cited, and those of each island separately,
in order not to extend this little work needlessly I will state the
most important ones, which are the following: Rice, sugar, cotton
(of choice quality and very fine), indigo, sulphur, siguey, balate,
wax, pepper, coffee, tortoise-shell, mother-of-pearl; gold, mines of
iron, and mines of copper (like that of Japon); tobacco, brazil-wood
[sibucao], and pearl-fisheries; oil, cacao, birds'-nests, and ebony
wood; lead (I believe that, as for the soil in some parts of Bisayas,
[64] it melts into lead, just as in the island of Mauricius, which
belongs to the French, it melts into iron); cocoanuts, which produce
abundance of oil; [65] horses; deer and buffaloes, from which the
people make what they call tapa [i.e., dried beef], and also use the
sinews; and bichuca, or rattans. [66]

The above-mentioned products are very abundant, and exceedingly
easy to collect. I do not, however, wish to include the following,
for the reasons which I have mentioned: Lead, [of which] I have not
personally actual experience, although I regard it as being as sure
as all the others; coffee, which, as it is not cultivated, is not
abundant, and its consumption is small for exportation, less than it
would be for España or Europa; iron, [the working of] which, although
it is very abundant, they have not yet succeeded in perfecting;
the pearl-fisheries, which are not operated; copper, the mines of
which are not worked; and cocoanuts, which are little used outside
[the islands] except for oil and nails. [67]

The second: The commodities that I have mentioned are exported to the
places that are enumerated as follows, and sell at prices that are
very profitable--although commerce has, as in all regions, its ups and
downs [sus altos y bajos]. To various ports of China: rice, sugar,
cotton, indigo, bichuca or rattan, balate, pepper, tortoise-shell,
mother-of-pearl, brazil-wood, ebony, tapa, the sinews of cattle,
birds'-nests, and lead when they have it. To the Malabar coast and
Persia: sugar in large quantities, which is sold for money. To the
Coromandel coast and Bengala: sugar, indigo, brazil-wood, sulphur,
pepper, siguey, birds'-nests, cotton, and often rice.

The third: The advantages and benefit which will accrue to his
Majesty from the commerce and exportation of the commodities and
products of those same islands are various, to wit: The more that
the commodities which they need from outside can be supplied from the
native products of the islands themselves, the more silver remains in
the [Spanish] dominions. The more commodities or fruits are exported,
so much more land will be cultivated, and many more people employed;
and consequently the tributes imposed by his Majesty can be all the
more easily collected, and from that time the royal exchequer will
be better filled; and the vassals, by being kept busy, become more
obedient and more loyal. The Spanish traders who are established there
are favored [by such policy]; for they obtain their profits on both
the exportation and the importation, and if one of these fail, the
other will be able to supply the deficiency; but the advantage will
be the greater if it can be obtained from both sources of gain. When
commerce is flourishing, his Majesty will obtain greater profits from
the customs duties, for which reason it is highly expedient that his
Majesty encourage the cultivation of the land and the increase of its
products--a thing which I do not consider difficult of accomplishment,
as I have already demonstrated in another little work, which I have
placed in the hands of the ministers. [68]

In order to demonstrate clearly how much the people of Manila could
avail themselves of the products of the land, I will relate what
occurred with myself (and it is a circumstance which proves what
I advanced in the second point), to wit: When I was at Manila the
exportation of sugar was rigorously prohibited, so that hardly could
a ship carry away enough for its own supply, [the authorities] telling
the vessel-owners that it was against the ordinances of his Majesty. I
remained for some time under this delusion, until I had carefully
examined the said ordinances, from which it was clear to me that his
Majesty had decreed everything in favor of his Indian vassals, and that
his royal will was, not to oppress them therein. It caused me, then,
much pain to see that this thing was so entirely misunderstood, since
this prohibition was diametrically opposed to it; for it forbade the
people to enjoy the benefits of the country which God had given them,
which the king never had intended to take away from them--especially
as this [commerce] is the only means that they possess by which they
can pay their tributes. Finally I undertook to establish generally
the exportation of sugar. Having been warned of the difficulties,
I went to the province where it [69] greatly abounds (which is
called Pampanga), and did what I could; it was agreed that I should
make an experiment, in order to please his Lordship. I consented,
on the condition that a certain Don Francisco Salgado, a careful
and industrious man, should be appointed my assistant; as I had
not the time to execute this plan, I only gave him all [necessary]
information and instructions. At last we succeeded in making indigo
so good that it stood every test, the severest and most certain that
are known being those of water and of fire. I sent specimens of that
quality to China, the Coromandel coast, Persia, and Londres [i.e.,
London]; in the first three places they were anxious to obtain it,
and offered good prices, and in the last-named one the indigo that
had cost 500 reals vellon was sold for 2,600 reals. They will be able
to manufacture every year such quantity as they desire.

I believe that I have succeeded in what I undertook to demonstrate,
which is as follows: First, to make known the abundance of the
products of the Philipinas Islands; second, to prove from my own
experience that it is easy to secure the benefit of these; third, to
set forth the advantage and benefit which will accrue to his Majesty,
to the Spaniards settled in those regions, and to the Indian vassals
generally.

I can say that charity has induced me to make known what I have already
related from my own experience, seeing that all that has hitherto
been written [on this subject] is very superficial; nor can the most
intelligent man form from those books a stable opinion of what these
islands are capable of yielding from their so abundant products.

This little work is condensed, but those who are capable of
comprehending it will see that it is [so] on account of being written
out of thorough understanding and knowledge of what I write about,
and not for lack of a very broad field in which I might descant,
for it cannot be denied that there is material for filling a volume.

Nevertheless, I do not claim to lay down the law, nor do I presume to
change any system; my intention is only to depict things as they are,
in order that his Majesty may have actual knowledge of the treasure
which he possesses in these islands. No advantage results to me, nor do
I expect more than to be a man ready to communicate [what he knows],
and desirous to do what shall depend on a limited ability, for the
greater benefit of his Majesty and the advancement of his realms. But
it is already time that we show in what consists the advantage and
benefit which will accrue to his Majesty from the Philipinas Islands.

What precedes this serves only to demonstrate that the Spaniards
settled in Manila have a broad field for carrying on a flourishing
commerce, and even it would redound much to the advantage of his
Majesty. But what I am earnestly advocating is cinnamon, and it is of
great importance to his Majesty and worthy of his royal attention;
and if I say that no one has hitherto, or since España conquered
the Philipinas, made a proposition so certain, so well founded,
and so advantageous to his Majesty, and to all his dominions and his
vassals, it is not much to say. For it is no exaggeration when I say
that it is more than the conquistador accomplished; he succeeded,
with honor and glory, in conquering the islands, but they have always
cost España most dearly for their maintenance. For not only do I aim
to relieve those expenses, which are so large, but those islands can
in a few years become a benefit to his Majesty, and to his vassals,
both Spaniards and Indians. I do not ask these gratuities, [70] nor
that the king should spend one maravedi; my chief object and desire
is, that a stable commerce be allowed from those countries to these
kingdoms by the most direct route.

No one is ignorant of the vast amount of silver which goes every
year from España to the Dutch for the supply of cinnamon, for it is
not less than many millions of pesos duros each year, as they have
estimated; but I affirm that this is because they [i.e., the Spaniards]
are willing to let the silver go out [of the country]. España might
with as good reason send to Olanda to buy her wine as her cinnamon. I
will not undertake to argue whence it comes, although I know it very
well. What I am trying to do, without offending any one, is to remedy
this lack which España suffers, that the Spaniards may use their good
judgment and their reason and become true patriots. What a pity it is
that his Majesty, possessing so noble a commodity, and being able to
place it on the market--with as good success as that of Ceylán, and
even at less than half of the price--should permit so many millions of
silver to pass every year from his dominions to the Dutch! which is to
furnish that people with arms for carrying on war when opportunity may
offer. It is well known that España consumes more cinnamon than all
the other nations; can there, then, be greater folly? In order (as I
suppose) to humor the Dutch, España leaves unused the cinnamon which
she has in her own house, in order to buy it from those enemies and
the destroyers of the holy faith in those countries; I say that this
is opposed to the Christian religion, and I prove it in a few words:
if España would avail herself of this product which she could so easily
dispose of, the Dutch could not maintain [their establishments in]
the island of Ceylon, and then España could even introduce missions
in that island. But what foolish talk! The Dutch maintain Ceilon? The
Spaniards support it; they pay for its ships, its fortresses, and its
garrisons which the Dutch have there--although in order to destroy
these the Spaniards need neither balls, nor gunpowder, nor war. If
any one thinks that this is a sweeping statement [es adelantar mucho],
we are of differing opinions, because to me it seems a moderate one.

I am known as a man who has accomplished much, who has traveled in
many lands, and who has not passed through them heedlessly; nor have I
stopped to consider the expenditure of money, or the risk to health,
in order to satisfy my curiosity and obtain well grounded knowledge
of all things wherever I have traveled. To the point: Samboanga, the
capital of the island of Mindanao, is the place which could produce
cinnamon as good as that of Ceylon, if our people knew how to cultivate
it; I have already made the experiment, and it will yield the amount
that I shall require. The Dutch are well aware of this, [as appears] by
evidence which can be verified by me; for they, with their trained and
accustomed cunning, placed in the said island a stone with the initial
letters of [the name of] their company engraved on it, like those
which they are wont to place in their bales of goods, etc., by way of
manifesting that these belong to the said company. The said stone was
brought to Manila while I was there, and was delivered to the Marques
de Obando; and his Lordship, knowing that I understood the tricks and
policy of those gentlemen, sent to call me, and, showing me the stone,
he said, "What is the meaning of this stone, which they have brought
to me under such-and-such circumstances?" I replied to his Lordship,
"It is nothing; it is a mark which the Dutch are wont to set up in
order to have a pretext, when opportunity offers, for laying claim to
the lands in which they have placed the said stones." [71] No one,
then, who understands that people--keen, mercenary, and always on
the watch--will fail to agree with me, that they do not set up these
stones in barren islands, unless it is evident that, on account of the
location of these islands, it will not suit the Dutch to have [other
people there as] close neighbors. When they abandoned the island of
Maurisius, considering it uninhabitable on account of its sterility,
they left no engraved stone in it. It is a circumstance which deserves
attention, and is even worthy of coming to his Majesty's knowledge;
and likewise those who have or have had practical knowledge of these
matters regard them in this way. Finally, I have compared the quality
of the soil at Samboanga with that of Ceylon, also the leaves of the
cinnamon tree; still more, I have gathered the bark of this tree at
Samboanga and made certain experiments with it, and when I compared
it with that from Ceylon they were of equal value. I consider, then,
[from] the manner of making these experiments with the cultivation
of the soil and the culture of the cinnamon, [that] it will prove to
be equal [to that of Ceylon]. Finally, in commencing the experiments
which I have made--with the greatest application and industry, and
enormous expenses--they are quite sufficient to prove that it will be
possible, in the term of five or six years, to produce a large part of
the best cinnamon which comes to Europa. This I have learned from the
experiment with a quantity of chocolate which I ordered to be made
in my own house at Manila; this product has been greatly liked by
the ladies, and by people of taste and understanding, in the said city.

In view of these proofs, which I have from actual knowledge of
the method of cultivating and preparing this product, it causes me
surprise that his Majesty is losing a source of profit so extensive
and lucrative; and I am persuaded that if full knowledge of them
could have reached the officials who might have authority to examine
the subject, they would have taken suitable measures to secure this
benefit--although it is certain that it would not be considered that
no one hitherto has attained it [i.e., such knowledge] except that
which is here explained by myself, which is the simple truth. And
as for what concerns my part, I can serve, if desirable, in carrying
out a work so national and so advantageous to his Majesty--in which
honor and fame spur me to place myself at the disposal of his Majesty,
without causing him the expenditure of one real of silver; for, thanks
to God, I have the means for travel. Nevertheless, I shall never weary
in the acquisition of the precious treasures of honor and truth; for
God only knows the exceeding satisfaction which I feel in being the
first and only person who has had the good fortune to furnish this
information, so clear and plain that, if it were published to the
world, I am sure that the rest of the nations would conspire against
me; for they know its great usefulness, and the little difficulty
which I would find in carrying out the plan.

I have been assured that the clove is found in Mindanao. I have made
every possible effort to investigate this, and I believe that it
is certainly so, although I cannot assert more than what experience
has taught me. But I can affirm with more certainty that the nutmeg
grows there, and needs only to be cultivated; also pepper of the best
quality, and most delicious, can be had in abundance. At present
the only thing left for us is to reflect upon the many advantages
and incredible benefits which will accrue to his Majesty, and to his
dominions and vassals, both Spaniards and Indians, without costing
him a real vellon to establish this commerce. The English and Dutch,
on the other hand, will spend millions to prevent the success of this
great project, for which reason it is evidently necessary to maintain
the utmost secrecy regarding it.





Recapitulation of the advantages and benefits of this commerce

First: The millions of pesos duros which now pass out of the domains
of his Majesty, with which the Dutch are enriching themselves and
promoting their main commerce, that of the cinnamon; they will have so
much less for hostilities against España, the more that this matter of
the cinnamon is pushed in that country, thus rendering it impossible
for them to carry away the silver thence.

Second: Great numbers of Indians would be employed who now have no way
in which to make a living or to pay their tributes; by this means not
only would they be relieved [from their burdens], but it would be with
great increase to the royal exchequer; and through their application
and gains they would consequently be more faithful and constant
vassals, while now idleness and vices prevent them from being such.

Third: The Philipinas Islands are suffering severely from the lack
of communication by a direct route with España; this could be easily
secured by arming the ships there, which need from España more people
than a few officers; and it would be very desirable to transport for
those islands some artisans whom they will need for promoting and
cultivating the various products of the land.

Fourth: The more that the lands are cultivated and their products
made available, the greater will be the number of men and of infidel
Indians that will be needed; and consequently they will submit [to
Spanish authority], and be converted into loyal vassals and friends,
and Christianity will be increased in those regions, without any fear
that the Moro and infidel enemies can disturb them.

Fifth: It will be possible to equip every year three or four ships
of six hundred to a thousand toneladas each, and despatch them for
Europa with cinnamon, pepper, and other spices which will be produced
there; and in return they will go back with various commodities and
fruits, the products of España, which the people of Manila always
find themselves compelled to buy from the English and Dutch, carrying
away the money for them. In this manner not only will these gains
remain within the dominions of his Majesty, without the other nations
being able to draw thence the money with which they carry on war,
[to the] injury of the commerce of España, but by this means the
[Spanish] dominions that are so remote will come to be to a large
extent dependent one upon another; and as the intercourse between
them would be mutual and friendly, the Indians consequently would
have occasion to see and experience the greatness [of the Spanish
power]. Thus they would come to be more faithful and loyal vassals,
and returning to their own lands, would influence their countrymen
to be the same.

Sixth: No one will deny my statement that the cinnamon would [thus] be
obtained at a much less cost [by the Spaniards] than that at which the
Dutch can sell it, unless [they encounter] less risk and danger--[which
are] so manifest that for the preservation of this commerce they find
themselves compelled to maintain a great number of troops and keep
up many forts and garrisons, solely to defend themselves. Let to all
this be added the governors, and the enormous number of people whom
they have in their service, with some very large expenses which arise
from the various opinions of the companies--the costs of which, so
ill applied, render the cinnamon more expensive (although in reality
its cost is low), and it is certain that their commerce in spices does
not prove to be so profitable as the nations assert. Very differently,
then, will it be in favor of España when she reaches the cultivation
of the cinnamon; for in place of the great expenses which his Majesty
has had ever since he took possession of the said island, without
its producing any benefit, he will obtain the greatest advantages
without spending a real vellon more than at present. Especially,
labor will be found as cheap, and the cultivation of the soil as easy,
as in Ceylon; and the navigation can be made with the same advantages
that [other] nations [possess], or even greater. For this reason the
cinnamon will cost the merchants forty or fifty per cent less than they
have actually paid hitherto. It is certain that it is a very serious
damage which España generally suffers in her commerce, from paying,
through this negligence, the freight charges of the Dutch ships,
and the cost of their officers and seamen; and they even maintain
their fortifications, etc., with the money which they obtain from
España for this product of cinnamon.

Seventh: Likewise, there would be great advantage to España in the
ships which would come from the Philipinas, as I have said (in the
fifth point); for they would return laden with many fruits and products
of these kingdoms of España.

Eighth: The Americans would likewise share in this great benefit;
for the cinnamon, for which they are today paying so exorbitant a
price, they would obtain at very nearly the same price at which it
is usually sold in Cadiz.

Ninth: If the cinnamon should become cheap, much chocolate would be
consumed by the poor; and consequently the duties would amount to
much more, to the advantage of his Majesty.

Notwithstanding that the greatness of the enterprise is clearly
demonstrated, and no additional information is needed, two things
ought to be noted. First, that no damage or expense can result to
his Majesty. Second, that from this arrangement, it is evident and
positive, not the least injury or disadvantage ensues to España or
to America; rather, it is a triple benefit, and indispensable--which,
[however,] without general experience and practical knowledge it would
be impossible to bring about without each dominion injuring the other;
for in this consists the superiority of a man who is an expert.

[The writer then proceeds to mention the spiritual advantages which
would result from the temporal; but his argument becomes somewhat lame
here, reducing itself to the "hope that, with the help of our Lord,
a firm and permanent peace with the Moros may be secured" He makes an
interesting statement regarding the extent of the ravages committed by
the Mindanao pirates: "I am certain, from accurate information, that
during the government of the Marqués de Obando he cost the king eight
millions of reals vellon [for this purpose], although he proceeded
with the utmost economy and care in the manner in which he used the
royal revenue; and, having made in the year 1755 a calculation of
the expenses which these piracies were causing to his Majesty and
his vassals (both Spaniards and Indians) from the ravages made by the
Moros and infidels during the eight years preceding, it amounted to
about eighty millions of reals vellon," not to mention the killing
of priests and native Christians. Of course, if peace is secured with
the Moros, the progress and extension of the missions in the islands
is assured. The writer again declares his devotion to the service of
God and the king, his readiness to explain his plans further to those
who desire more information, and his confidence that they will command
the confidence of men of understanding, judgment, and patriotism.]

Although through experience (tempus edrax rerum) one can come to
know the utility and advantage which will accrue from the execution
of this so vast enterprise, I trust that I have demonstrated it quite
sufficiently to render it worthy of the consideration of his Majesty;
nevertheless, seeing how much is involved, it is fitting for my
honor to furnish proofs, the most detailed and circumstantial. This
induces me to quote part of the lading which came in seventeen ships
of the Company of Olanda, as published in the Gazette of Amsterdam,
dated on July 3 of this present year, one thousand seven hundred and
fifty-nine--products which are and may be those of the very islands
in question; and in order to show how very important it is to give
attention to what is herein proposed, each commodity is valued at the
regular price which it can bring in the ports of Cadiz, Alicante, etc.


Prices

    Libras    [Commodities]       Reals           reals vellon
                                  vellon per      Total,
                                  libra

    4,672,746 of pepper               7           32,709,222
       50,000 of nutmeg              39            1,950,000
       60,000 of mace                70            4,200,000
      360,000 of cloves              50           18,000,000
      375,840 of cinnamon            58           21,198,720
        3,000 of candied nutmeg      60              180,000
        2,398 of candied cloves      70              167,860
      883,142 of sugar                3.94 [72]   [3,424,000]
       40,490 of camphor             16              649,840
        6,582 of benzoin             22              134,936
       10,500 of borax               15              157,500
       12,146 of gum-lac             12              145,752
        3,000 of gum myrrh           12               36,000
        3,514 of gamboge             16               56,224
       20,049 of indigo,
              superior               30              601,470
                                                  ----------
    [Total,] eighty-three millions, six hundred
    and eleven thousand, five hundred and
    twenty-four reals vellon.                     83,611,524


I have taken into consideration the objections which may be brought
forward by persons who are little acquainted with trade, and these are
reduced, substantially, to the following: That the consumption of these
commodities in the dominions of his Majesty cannot be regulated by the
above calculation. They speak glibly; but, in order not to lose time
with these persons, I answer them, that one is compelled to encounter
ignorance, but the only concern of great souls is to serve faithfully
their kings and nations, and endure the calumnies which are uttered
against honest men--imitating the stars, which, no matter how much the
dogs bark, do not cease to shine down upon them and to follow their
own courses. Accordingly, let us proceed to truths which are plain:

First: that the Dutch carry these commodities in large quantities, as
is above stated--a proof that there is a consumption for that amount,
and that this is a profitable trade. Second: that the calculation
which I have made cannot be defective, since the [amounts of the]
commodities agree with the figures published by the Dutch themselves;
and the prices are obtained from the Company of Druggists, in
accordance with what they pay for the goods at the ports. Third: that
the greater part [of these commodities], and the most important ones,
if not [all], can be the products of the Philipinas Islands. Fourth:
that these commodities must cost much less than in Olanda, or in any
other country, is manifest and undeniable for this reason, that the
Dutch are obliged to incur enormous expenses--for governors, members
of council, lesser servants without number, and many troops--in order
to maintain their establishments; and these expenses increase just so
much the prices of their spices, so that, if they buy these from the
[Eastern] nations at ten, the goods are worth to them twenty-five. This
would not occur with us, because the king does not need to increase
the expenses in order to secure the advancement of the islands. It
would be entirely different; for, if these plantations are established,
thousands of Indians who now are suffering the utmost poverty without
having any opportunity to work, and for the same reason cannot pay
their tributes, would have a means of gaining their living and of
paying their tributes, and on this very account it would serve much
for the increase of the royal revenue.

As these Indians are not paid for their labor at higher rates than are
those among whom the Dutch reside, we must reckon, for the reasons
here stated, that those same commodities would cost much less, and
that the Spaniards could sell them at lower prices than do the Dutch;
and, as the merchant in every country buys where he will find his
greatest advantage, España would be the fair for these commodities
which have already enriched so many nations. But let us proceed to
reveal the cunning of the Dutch, who furnish only three millions,
seven hundred and fifty thousand, eight hundred and forty libras of
cinnamon--which, at the rate of sixteen onzas a libra, make six [73]
millions, thirteen thousand, four hundred and forty onzas. The rule
for making chocolate is to take ten libras of cacao, ten of sugar, and
eight onzas of cinnamon, or even less, and on account of the waste [74]
it is computed that the result will be twenty libras net; consequently,
from the three millions, seven hundred and fifty thousand, eight
hundred and forty libras of cinnamon could be made fifteen millions,
thirty-three thousand, six hundred libras of chocolate.

Although it is folly to make such a proposition, I ask whether there
are not in España, [75] all America, the Philipinas Islands, and, in
short, all the so various domains of his Majesty, counting all these
together, four millions of persons who drink chocolate sixty-four
times in the year, in accordance with the rule of one onza for each
time. Even the most ignorant or malicious person will not deny my
proposition; this makes, then, the consumption of chocolate sixteen
millions of libras, and for making it there will be needed four
hundred thousand libras of cinnamon.

Hence are drawn two conclusions. One is, the extreme craftiness of
the Dutch, in not furnishing more than the said quantity in order
to supply the Spaniards, and in making them believe that they will
be left without chocolate; and thus they succeed in obliging the
Spaniards to pay for the cinnamon at the very high prices which the
Dutch have fixed in these recent years--for it is a hundred per cent
more costly, and fifty per cent worse in quality; therefore there is
an increase of a hundred and fifty per cent in favor of the Dutch,
and of three hundred per cent to the injury of España, who without
reason endures this tyranny. Therefore, if the Dutch are not mistaken
in the estimate of cinnamon which they published in the Gazette, and as
the consumption [of that spice] in España is as I have made evident,
there will not be cinnamon to supply all the nations; nevertheless,
there will be no lack of it in any of them. [76]

Second: since it is so evident that in the dominions of his Majesty
there is consumed in [the beverage of] chocolate alone (without
counting the numerous kinds of food in which use is made of it)
sixteen millions of libras, and in order to make it there are needed
four hundred thousand of cinnamon, at the rate of fifty-eight reals
vellon that quantity will cost twenty-three millions, three hundred
thousand reals vellon, which is the least that España could advance
for the execution of the project. Moreover, I do not know any reason
for not admitting the commodity of pepper--which not only is so
exceedingly abundant in the islands, but I persuade myself that,
since it is so excellent in its crude state, it would with skilful
treatment be better than that of any [other] country. It is also plain
to us that the Dutch bring [to Europa] four millions, six hundred
and seventy-two thousand, seven hundred and forty-six libras of it;
they assure me that only because of the great abundance of garlic
[77] in España the pepper brings no more than seven reals vellon a
libra--[at which rate] the above quantity will amount to thirty-two
millions, seven [hundred] and nine thousand, two hundred and twenty-two
reals vellon. This added to the twenty-three millions, three hundred
thousand reals [for cinnamon] will make fifty-six millions, nine
thousand, two hundred and twenty-two reals vellon.

People will say, "Where would we consume so much pepper?" Then where
does Olanda consume it, I would like to know? "[And there are] Francia
and Inglaterra; do they bring much less [to Europa]?" Do not those
who ask such questions know how much the king is paying to Norbega
[i.e., Norway] and the northern countries for lumber, cordage, etc.,
for the construction in his royal navy? and that, if it happens that
care is not given in time to the planting of oak groves, he will need
much more [from those countries]?--At present these commodities are
paid for in ready money, which would not be the case if we could give
the merchants there the pepper, etc., so cheaply (or at less expense
than [if purchased from] another country), on account of the great
consumption of pepper which there is in those countries, and because
this would be a [form of] trade that is mutually advantageous, as I
have already said, for the day-laborer and the shepherd. It would be
permanent, and many millions of reals which now leave España would
remain here, to the greatest advantage not only of his Majesty, but
of his vassals. I say, then, that no one is able to deny these two
propositions, of which his Majesty will be best able to judge. Have
I heard some one argue that España has [78] need of preventing thus
the exportation of silver? Such arguments are foolish, and one should
laugh at them.

Do we not know that Olanda commands that a very large part of the
spice product be burned and destroyed, in order that a commodity which
brings her so enormous a profit should not, through its excessive
abundance, contribute to her loss? I say, then, that if España reaches
an excessive abundance of silver, it would be far better for the king
to command that the mines be closed, or to fling the silver into the
sea, than to let it pass into the hands of those who tomorrow can
avail themselves of it to carry on war [against España]. Others I have
heard talk [on this subject], so frivolously that I was astounded,
hinting at the resentment of this other nation if España should
profit by what is her own--that is, the execution of the proposition
[that I have made]. That is the same as to say that Inglaterra or any
other nation could declare that España shall not cultivate the ground
or sow the wheat, because it suited that nation to supply it; it is
to talk very heedlessly, without knowing that España can limit the
commerce of Francia, Inglaterra, and Olanda whenever she desires,
without cannon-ball or gunpowder, by the prohibition of silver
alone. If she chooses to deprive any one of those countries of this
advantage, she has only to calculate what she owes to the other two
for the net balance of their trade, and then not allow any more silver
to go out to those countries; and these, needing it for themselves,
will not be able to supply the other one. I can assert that España,
if she would avail herself of the rights which God has given her,
would make herself more worthy of respect by depriving the [other]
nations of what is essential, not only for their commerce, but for
waging war to advantage.

I believe that no one will dispute the advantages and benefit which
can accrue from the Philipinas Islands, and it is this which from the
outset I have attempted to demonstrate, although I omit, for the sake
of brevity, the explanation of many things.

Keeping in mind how much I owe to the infinite mercy and goodness of
supreme Providence, in the second part of the work alluded to, which
I presume to present to his Majesty, I have treated at length of the
ravages which the Moros have committed during very many years in those
islands, and of the exceeding damage which they thus cause to our holy
Roman Catholic and apostolic faith, for I cannot do less. Indeed,
it is evident that God has assisted me with His divine Grace; and
therefore I certainly ought to defend and, if it should be necessary,
die for His cause. Accordingly, in whatever concerns the subjection
of the Moros, and consequently the protection and advancement of the
holy faith in those islands, I hope to deserve that his Majesty will do
me the honor of appointing six lieutenant-commanders--three from his
royal navy, and three from his army--in order that they may examine
with the utmost care the plan upon which I have based my proposition,
giving their opinions in writing for presentation to his Majesty,
in two copies, one for his Majesty's royal Council of the Indias,
the other for myself.

When this examination shall be made, and the plan approved by the king
if such be his royal will, I will immediately proceed to furnish the
plan of the whole matter which I have drawn up for the execution of
the project--from which, after further investigations (which are very
just, and perhaps will be quite unprecedented) his Majesty can more
easily decide what shall be most expedient in this matter, as also
the selection of persons for the said purpose.

As for what pertains to the commerce, for greater certainty I deemed it
expedient to communicate my intention to Don Antonio Butlert [sic],
formerly a merchant of Cadiz--since he is distinguished not only
for his great success in business and his genuine friendship to this
nation, but by his long experience in and thorough knowledge of the
commerce of these dominions--asking him to give me his disinterested
opinion on the subject, in which he should consider with the utmost
attention the general welfare of these dominions; and this opinion I
have, in writing, and signed with the name of his firm, which reads
"Butlert and Matheos."

Some persons who are little acquainted with affairs so vast, and who
have still less ability to make ready for the great things which
remain to be done, will suppose that the execution [of this plan]
is easy, to one who has the writings which I have already furnished;
nevertheless, if they engaged in the undertaking they would find
themselves much mistaken, and the result would be greatly to the
detriment of the nation.

Warned by what I have passed through, and dreading [the effects of]
ignorance and malice, I have reached the decision to supplicate the
king to grant me the honor of this examination--desiring, whatever
may fall to my lot, to prove that I have no other purpose than to
serve faithfully both Majesties and their vassals, and entreating
them for this end to dispose of my life and person, of which I will
gladly make sacrifice in proof of my loyalty and sincere devotion.





Extracts from the proposition of Don Nicolas Norton Nicols; the
conditions which he requires; the benefits and advantages which will
accrue to his Majesty and his vassals, on whose account his Majesty
was pleased to issue a decree on the twenty-third of February last.


The aim of the said proponent is, to establish in the Philipinas
Islands plantations of cinnamon, pepper, other spices, etc., and to
open a direct commerce between the said islands and Cadiz, by way of
the Cape of Good Hope.

Conditions.--That he shall be permitted to undertake the said route
from Cadiz, or may go to the said islands and make the voyage from
there to Cadiz, as he shall find most convenient. If he shall set out
from Cadiz, on account of not having time to build ships he shall be
permitted to buy whatever vessels [he may need], without excepting
those of foreigners. The cargo from Cadiz must consist of different
fruits, liquids, [79] and commodities that are products of España
and of her commerce, as on the return voyage it must be from the
various products and commodities of the said islands and of their
commerce. That his Majesty remit the duties for the first voyage,
and that the proponent be permitted to embark freely at Cadiz the
silver that he needs to defray the purchase of his return cargo. On
the second voyage he shall pay at Cadiz not only the five per cent
duties but the three per cent of the silver which he shall thereafter
embark, as is done with the [traders of foreign] nations. In order to
obviate any objection, he will not enter any port belonging to his
Majesty or to any power of Europa; he shall, however, be permitted
to enter and anchor at any one of the Indian ports, whether in these
or in those seas, and therein buy, sell, exchange, or lade the goods
which shall be offered to him.

The advantages, etc., will be the following: His Majesty will not
subject his royal revenue to any expense, nor will it be exposed to
the evil designs of men, or to the doubtful patriots who pretend to
have knowledge. There is no treaty that can be set against him, as he
can prove. By the most moderate computation, the Dutch annually export
four millions of pesos for the spice-trade; this, therefore, is to make
them powerful, to the injury of España. Norvega, St. Petersbourgh,
and other countries demand a great amount of cash for lumber, pitch,
cordage, sails, etc., for the royal shipbuilding, the greater part
of which would be paid for in spices, as these are greatly liked in
those countries. Equivalent injury to España, as is stated above. [80]
The commodities and products of España would have a much larger
market. A strong stimulus to the cultivation of the soil. His Majesty
would experience much relief in the expenses of transportation for
the missions. This navigation would serve as a nursery for the navy,
as is found by experience in other countries. The direct communication
would serve as a check on a thousand abuses, not only in the government
of the islands, but in other matters. If his Majesty should grant
this privilege to the said islands, it would be most just that the
commonwealth of Manila should carry on its commerce with Acapulco at
its own cost, without laying the burden of it on his Majesty. By not
possessing this commerce when she can have it, España is maintaining
thousands of strangers in place of a like number of her own vassals;
[the latter would] redound to the increase of the royal revenue, and in
the course of years to the propagation of the holy faith. The Moros,
who now are by their wars destroying the felicitous progress of the
Christian religion, when they found by experience how much more it
suited their own interests to maintain peace and commerce with the
Spaniards than to wage war against them, would inviolably observe
their treaties; for, notwithstanding the cruelties which the Dutch
practice against their Indians, the latter tolerate them on account
of the advantages of their commerce. The people of Manila will, when
they have a market for their products, cultivate the land; they will
establish family estates, and enrich themselves; and their riches,
like those of the Americans, will finally come to España. The duties
which your Majesty would receive from this new commerce would in a very
few years amount to very considerable sums. It would be a stimulus
to other new commercial undertakings, which would be beneficial to
his Majesty and his vassals.



The whole matter in small compass

His Majesty, without risking anything, is going to gain infinitely
more than what has been [here] stated. The method of securing these
vast benefits is the easiest and safest which can be put into practice,
and itself makes plain the useful and salutary design of the proponent.


Don Nicolas Norton Nicols








BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA


The documents in this volume are obtained from the following sources:

1. Santa Misericordia.--From Manifiesta y resumen historico de la
fundacion de la venerable hermandad de la Santa Misericordia (Manila,
1728), by Juan Bautista de Uriarte; from a copy in the possession of
Edward E. Ayer, Chicago.

2. Survey of the Philipinas.--From a MS. in the Museo-Biblioteca de
Ultramar, Madrid--pressmark, "24-4a.-1.735;" various plans in it are
here reproduced.

3. Order of St. John.--From Religiosa hospitalidad por los hijos del
... S. Ivan de Dios en Philipinas (Granada, 1742); from a copy in
the possession of Edward E. Ayer.

4. Letter to president of Council.--A copy, furnished by Sr. D. Roman
Murillo, Madrid, of the original MS., which he, as librarian of the
Academia Española, Madrid, found among other papers therein, this
being the only one relating to the Philippines.

5. Letter by a Jesuit.--From Ventura del Arco MSS. (Ayer library),
iv, pp. 297-305.

6. Commerce of the Philipinas.--From a MS., either the original rough
draft or a contemporaneous copy, in the possession of Edward E. Ayer.

7. Relation of the Zambals.--From a certified copy--procured for us by
Sr. D. Manuel de Yriarte, chief of Division of Archives at Manila--of
the original MS., which is preserved in the archives of the convent
of Santo Domingo in Manila.








APPENDIX: RELATION OF THE ZAMBALS


By Domingo Perez, O.P. MS. dated 1680.

Source: A certified copy of the original MS., which is preserved in
the archives of the convent of Santo Domingo, Manila.

Translation: This is made by James Alexander Robertson.








RELATION OF THE ZAMBALS


RELATION OF THE ZAMBAL [81] INDIANS OF PLAYA HONDA, THEIR SITUATION AND
CUSTOMS. BY FATHER FRAY DOMINGO PEREZ, OF THE ORDER OF PREACHERS AND
VICAR-PROVINCIAL OF THE RELIGIOUS WHO ASSIST IN THE SAID MISSION. YEAR
OF 1680 [82]


The very reverend father, Fray Baltazar de Santa Cruz, prior-provincial
of this province of Santo Rossario of the Order of Preachers in these
Philipinas Islands, having visited the villages (which we have today
united and their inhabitants reduced to the said villages) and us two
ministers who for the space of nine months have been busied in the
reduction of said Indians, said reverend father provincial ordered
me to write a treatise on the site whence we have drawn the Indians
whom we have reduced, their customs, and mode of living.

In order that the evangelical ministers who have to work in this
mission may be able more clearly to direct those souls redeemed by the
blood of our Lord Christ along the true pathway of heaven from which
they have strayed so far for so many years blinded with the darkness of
infidelity and idolatry; also in order that this paper may be used so
that the ministers of justice of the king, our sovereign, may subject
said Indians and establish them under the obedience of his Catholic
Majesty: although it is true that for more than sixty years they had
ministers of the gospel, neither said ministers nor his Majesty have
been able to succeed in getting them to live in a settlement so that
they may be administered or have justice as today it is hoped that
they will be. The most that it has been possible to obtain with them
was that distinct bands of them should unite on various occasions
in the mountain on the plateau where the ministers had a house and
church. But they immediately broke up again, said division occasioning
the wars which those Indians generally wage among their different
bands, and the alcaldes-mayor were unable to punish the guilty and
ungovernable because of the greater distance from the chief cities
where the alcaldes-mayor live to these places, and because the coast
of the sea is so rough during all the time of the vendavals and south
winds, that it is impossible to navigate along it, while the road
overland is so rough and blocked by mountains full of black enemies
(those mountains being very rough in parts), and in the ravines there
are very great rivers with very strong currents, so that in the rainy
season one can have no communication from this place, with Pangasinan,
or with Mariueles, or with Pampanga; and during the dry season these
Indians are generally with the blacks in the mountains trading wax:
consequently, they have never been obedient to the alcaldes-mayor, and
hence, neither to his Majesty nor to the gospel ministers whom they
have hitherto had. Although they have had ministers of great virtue
and most ardent zeal for souls, as can be seen in the annals of their
sacred order and even today, there are ex-provincials who have been
their ministers whose signal virtues are apparent to all the community.



Of the site and district of Playa Honda

Playa Honda begins at the doors of Mariueles and extends along
the mountains which border Pampanga to the point of Sunga and near
Pangasinan, which is distant more than forty leguas from Mariueles to
the visita of the Christian Baga Indians who are administered by the
minister of Mariueles. They perform their duties toward the Church
every year, notwithstanding that they show very many imperfections,
a fact which is not surprising, since the minister cannot be with
them all the time that he would like, as the coast is inaccessible
all the time of the vendavals. During that time they must necessarily
live without a minister to instruct them. That visita has thirty
tributes. Although they have a village laid out with its church and
house for the minister, they do not live in the said village except
when the minister goes to visit them. They live in their rancherías
whence they get molave wood in abundance. They have sufficient fields
in said village for all, and for twice as many more if they cared to
cultivate them, but they apply themselves more earnestly in cutting
said timber than in farming their fields. They get considerable help
for [cutting] said wood from the blacks of the mountain, for those
blacks are excellent woodsmen. All those blacks are tributary and
pay twelve reals annually for their tribute. The tribute is managed
by the Indians, and the encomendero does not meddle with them in
the collection of the tribute from the blacks, but the Indians pay
the said tribute for the blacks. Hence the black serves the Indian
all the year, without the black having other profit at the end of
the year than his tribute paid. This is the reason why the village
is continually without people, because the Indians, on account of
the profit from the work of the blacks, go to live with the blacks,
or near the pass of the mountain, where said blacks live, in order
to assist them in the work, for the blacks unless assisted physically
do not work. Four leguas from this visita toward the north is another
visita called Mariyumo, administered also by the said father minister
of Mariueles. Its people are Christians, although very bad ones, and
seriously lacking in the faith, and have very many imperfections. They
have very many superstitions and are much given to omens. Not all of
them are very fit to receive the annual communion. They also have a
village laid out and a church and house for the minister. However,
they do not live in the said village, but in their rancherías, much
divided among themselves as are those of Baga; although they are not
such absolute masters of the blacks as are those of Vaga, they also
have blacks under trust on which account they receive many vexations
from the encomendero, for it is the regular thing for them to pay the
tribute for the blacks. The latter are more free than the blacks of
Vaga, for they have more land where they can spread out, which those
of Vaga do not have. Those Indians also possess considerable molave
timber, but they are lazier than the Indians of Vaga. Consequently,
there is no one to cut the wood unless the corregidor of the island who
administers justice to them, forces them to cut said wood. It would be
doing a great service to God to unite the latter Indians with those
of Baga, so that our holy Catholic faith might be well administered
to them. They number about forty tributes, and, if they are united
with those of Vaga, they can have a minister in residence where they
will be well administered, and where they have lands sufficient for
their farming, and timber in abundance. In such case there would not
be so great a scarcity of that product in the city of Manila.

One legua from Mariyumo begins the bay which lies back of the
mountains of Abucay and Samal, where we commenced to get the Indians
whom we have collected in this Nuevo Toledo. The said bay has plenty
of fish. Its mouth is about one legua wide, and is closed by a small
island surrounded by many reefs on the southern side, but on the north
it is very deep--so that any sized ship can enter even when laden. But
the said bay has no port and lies in the course of all the vendaval
and the south winds. It is five leguas long stretching toward the
east, and as many wide. Along all that bay, which it will take two
days to coast, were scattered twenty-two families, who are today
living in this village of Nuevo Toledo where they have their houses
and fields. Having passed the said bay and entered the mountain,
one legua inland in the mountain, one enters a very level and long
plain. One-half legua inland in the plain, is situated the first
village called Nuevo Toledo. That plain is six leguas wide and eight
long. It is bounded on the east by some very rough mountains which lie
between the province of Pampanga and that plain; at the foot of those
mountains were the rancherías of Balacbac, which has fourteen families;
Lacnipan which had seven; Sigle which had fourteen more; Aglao which
had thirty-three. All those families were scattered, so that in no
ranchería did five families live together. The sea properly called
Playa Honda bathes its western coast. On the sea-coast were thirty-six
families of very pernicious Indians, all of whom we collected into the
village of Santa Rossa de Banguen, where they possess their houses and
fields. Those Indians were scattered along the creeks and carrizals
[83] near the sea, along six leguas of coast and level land beyond
the plain running toward the north two leguas. At the foot of some
very rough mountains between the sea and Buquil, there were fourteen
other families whom we have also collected in said village of Santa
Rossa de Banguen, which today consists of fifty families. That said
village of Santa Rossa is six leguas from that of Nuevo Toledo over
a stretch of level land in which there is a very great abundance
of game. Many were supported by that and had no fields and wherever
they caught the deer or carabao they stayed there until they finished
eating it. But at present they possess their gardens in the village,
and since care is taken in this, they will not be lazy, and will live
in the village where, having their gardens and the food from them,
they will not have so great need of the hunt. Six leguas farther on in
another site called Nalso, a plain where are stationed the presidio
and fort of Pinauen in a corner of said plain at the foot of the
mountains of Buquil, was a little village of about forty families,
which the very reverend father, Fray Joseph de la Santísima Trinidad,
ex-provincial of his order, had collected in said district. There
were there, moreover, twelve families who had recently descended
the mountains of Buquil, whom, since they were far from the fields,
and the flight to the mountains was very near and five families
had returned to the mountains, and there was no assurance of the
others if left in said site, we transferred to the visita of Alalam,
which is now composed of eighty families. The latter place is seven
leguas from the village of Santa Rossa de Banguen. Those who have
had most difficulty have been the thirty-three families whom we moved
from the site and district of Aglao, as they were very wild Indians,
and little or not at all softened until the present, and said site is
distant six leguas from the village of Nuevo Toledo where we stationed
it. Three leguas of the road are very bad, and there is not a drop
of water to be found for four leguas, during all the dry season. The
road is over sandy ground which is very large and full of rocks left
by the river which flows from the mountain of Pinatuba; and in those
places where there are no rocks, but only the sand, the road is also
very wearisome because that sand has no cohesion, and the least wind
that blows lifts the dust which blinds the travelers and has thus cost
the greatest hardship to those of this district who take that road in
going and coming between the village and the mountain. In the month of
January of this year of eighty, we had them all ready in the village,
and I, taking them to the mountain so that they might bring down their
possessions and rice to the village, and each family having brought
down five baskets of rice, one-half the distance along the road,
more than half of the people fell sick, because of the great labor
which it cost them to pass the said sandy ground. On that account I
ordered them to abandon their rice and possessions and to bring it
down little by little, and in order that they might make their gardens
before the season should expire, and so that they might finish their
houses. They have already finished them, and their gardens are at a
musket-shot's distance from the village, according to the edict which
Governor Don Juan de Vargas Hurtado, knight of the habit of Santiago,
changed for them for that purpose. Even in these slight things, his
Lordship has been active on account of his so great desire that the
Indians be reduced and be reasonable, if we may so say, for as will be
seen in their customs in which they have been reared until the present,
they were wandering very far from nationality and civilization.

The village of Nuevo Toledo was composed of more than one hundred
families, and that of Santa Rossa de Banguen, of fifty, in the
month of January of this year 1680. All declared themselves before
Adjutant Alonso Martinez Franco, superior commandant of the fort of
Paynauen. The latter, at the evident risk of his life, and with the
continual watchfulness and zeal of a fervent religious, without heeding
his own interest which he would have had if he wished to pay no heed to
the order of his superior, and to receive the offerings of gold which
the Indians made to him so that he should not oblige them to leave
their recesses, has aided us to his own great credit in collecting the
Indians whom we have today in the two said villages. He made lists of
the people who were in the two villages above mentioned, who amounted
to seven hundred and seventy persons. Those people persevere even yet
in the said two villages, and will persevere so long as the efforts
which are being made to reduce those who are yet intractable in the
mountains, do not cease. The said adjutant and superior commandant of
the said presidio also formed the new village of Alalam by withdrawing
its ancient inhabitants from the places where they lived before, and
brought them within a musket-shot of their fields. They were before
that one legua distant from their fields. That site has a small bay,
which the sea forms there, where there is very good fishing, and
where boats can safely enter. The said village did not have such a
bay before, in the former site. He also made lists of the Indians
whom he brought to the said village, who are the ones of Nalso who
were located at the foot of the mountains of Buquil, and those who
descended said mountains. I was not present when the said lists
were made and hence do not know the number of the persons there,
but it is evident to me that those gathered in the said village
number more than fifty families. I have seen their houses which are
already finished, and are excellent buildings, made of strong and
hard materials. Those Indians also will retain in the said village,
which is large, the horror which they have for the Spanish arms, and
more, if the raids of the Spaniards on the Indians who still keep to
the mountains are repeated.



Of the idolatries of all those Indians

Having to treat of the idolatries, superstitions, and customs of the
Zambals, I think I ought first to mention that my purpose is not to
discourage the ministers of the gospel, who have to plant our holy
Catholic faith among those Indians, but to impart to them the brief
information which I possess of the little which I have ascertained in
respect to the great amount which there is to ascertain, and which will
be discovered with the lapse of time, concerning the customs of that
blind people, who have lived so misguidedly and so far from reason at
the doors of the true evangelical light which we profess. Although they
are surrounded by provinces whose inhabitants are excellent Christians,
such as the provinces of Pampanga, Pangasinan, and Mariueles, yet
notwithstanding they have been influenced very little or not at
all for the good by the customs of the Christians, on account of
their lack of communication with them; for they only go to the said
provinces to trade and traffic for a brief space of time, and then,
if anybody is careless they cut off his head. Hence, as I have said,
they have but little communication with reasonable people. On the
contrary, I think this paper of mine will serve as a stimulus for us
religious, who, leaving our convents of our fatherland España and our
friends and relatives, being moved by the zeal for souls, come to these
Philipinas Islands to publish our holy Catholic faith, to preserve it,
and teach good morals. All this drags us from our provinces in España,
and deprives us of our fatherland. Here, then, among these miserable
Zambals, we shall find much to do. It is unnecessary to go to seek
infidels in other kingdoms, for we have them here, although few;
and at the same time we have one to subject them for us and place
them under our obedience. I say then that this paper of mine will
serve as a stimulus to the ministers of the gospel to come to employ
themselves in the service of our Lord and His holy Catholic faith,
when they consider the great evil that there is to tear out and
eradicate from the hearts of these Indians, and the great good that
they lack to make them Christians. And although there are very many
baptized persons among them, yet in nothing at all are any of them
different from the others, if one considers their customs and mode of
living. Those baptized are as idolatrous as those not baptized. I am
not surprised at this, for until now the former ministers have not
had any opportunity for living in residence among them, since they
have not cared to collect them into a settlement. And if they have
collected them, it has been for a short time only, and their evil
customs have taken them again to the mountains and recesses whence
we have drawn them, but today according to the efficacy which the
governor of these Philipinas Islands places in the spiritual and
temporal good of these wretched creatures, we have excellent hopes
that they will persevere in their settlements and will be able to be
taught the true pathway to heaven.

These Indians have their priests and priestesses, although such have
no jurisdiction over the others; for here everyone is master of his
own will, and they alone recognize superiority in one in so far as he
gives authority to the other priests and priestesses for some special
sacrifices. This last is done to the one who pays well for it. This
priest is called bayoc, and he dresses like a woman. He wears a tapis
[84] or apron, and ties up his hair like a woman, although above the
tapis he wears and girds his catan, on the left side, and on the right
side, his yua [85] as other men. Those are the weapons of all these
Indians and no one goes without them, even though it be within his
own house. The idol to whom this bayoc principally offers sacrifice
is called Malyari, which means "powerful." This idol is made with a
wooden head and its body and hands of straw. They dress it up like
an image after their manner, place it on its altar and niche, then
light for it torches of pitch for lack of wax candles. All the people
of the ranchería assemble to make the sacrifice. Having built his
altar, the bayoc takes his spear in his hand and makes three holes in
the earth with it. Those holes are filled with wine, and the spear,
having been thrust into the ground, the bayoc begins his sacrifice,
with a leaf of wild anahao or wild palm in his hand. He commences
to shiver, his whole body trembling, and making many wry faces by
means of his eyes, he generally talks, sometimes between his teeth,
without anyone understanding him. Sometimes he contents himself with
the wry faces which he makes with his eyes and the tremblings of all
his body. After a few minutes he strikes himself twice on the knee
with the hand in which he holds the palm-leaf, and says that he is
the anito to whom the sacrifice is being made. At this the sacristan
(for the devil has even in this the semblance of God and wishes to
resemble His Divine Majesty) explains the need of the person who
orders the sacrifice made. The bayoc promises to fulfil the desire
of the person who is having the sacrifice made, and immediately
the bystanders begin to sing certain songs in praise of the anito or
idol. While they are being sung, they give the bayoc and the sacristan
something to drink, and after those two, all those present drink. But
no one drinks or eats anything that has been offered in the sacrifice
until the bayoc eats or drinks, for they say they would die if they
ate or drank before the anito, and for the anito to eat or drink is
no other thing than for the bayoc to eat or drink.

The office of sacristan, although the bayoc gives it to whomever he
wishes, is not of great estimation, and in the absence of the one
appointed for such office, the bayoc substitutes in his place the
first one he lays his eyes on. But the office of bayoc is held in high
estimation among them, and I am not surprised, for it possesses such
advantages that for certain honors which he performs for a deceased
person, they generally give him ten taes in gold. Those honors are
performed so that the soul of the deceased may leave its relatives, for
they say that the said soul always follows them until said honors are
shown it. [86] Those honors are not shown to all, because all people
do not have the means for those expenses. When they are performed,
all the relatives and friends of the deceased are invited to be present
at them. They offer food made of rice, buyo, tobacco, and wine to the
amount that seems sufficient for the guests. Then clothing Malyari
as abovesaid, and presiding over the ceremonies in a two-fold manner,
[87] there is pure disorder. Some lament, some sing, some play their
musical instruments, and some dance after their manner. But whatever
those who lament and those who sing, lament and sing is in memory of
the deceased. Finally, what is offered is consumed, and when they
finish eating and drinking, the sacrifice is finished, and each of
the guests takes his cup from which he has drunk, although some are
accustomed to leave them, but they are the fewest. Consequently,
if one hundred persons attended the honors one hundred other cups
would have to be obtained for each person to take his cup. It is to
be noticed that they do not always dress the anito Malyari, for only
the bayoc has it, but whenever said bayoc offers sacrifices for any
deceased person he dresses it, although some sacrifices are also made
to other anitos without dressing said Malyari.

They also have their kind of baptism, which only the bayoc has
authority to administer, first making a sacrifice to Malyari in the
abovesaid manner. At the same time, they clothe the one baptized
according to their fashion. He looses his hair and hangs at the
ends some small pieces of gold. The sacrifice having been finished,
in place of water the bayoc baptizes him with the blood of a hog,
either of the domestic or wild variety. The relatives of the one
baptized stand all about him and the former on top of a rock. The
ceremonies having been finished, the bayoc cuts the ends of the hair
of the baptized person, from which hang the bits of gold, and flings
them aloft, and the bystanders collect them hurriedly. That gold
is afterward held in high estimation and with difficulty will they
let go of it. Consequently, those nearest the one baptized and his
relatives, while the ceremonies and the sacrifice are being performed,
sing certain songs, and all those who are present answer them. However,
there are also very few who are baptized in this manner, because the
fees which are given to the bayoc are large, and generally amount to
eight taes of gold. If while the sacrifice or the ceremony of baptism
is being performed, the bystanders make a great racket, and if after
the bayoc has ordered them to keep still, the noise does not abate,
then the bayoc takes some bran, dust, or sand, and flings it into the
air over the heads of those who are making the racket, and after that
is done no one dares to open his mouth and all the racket stops.

The method exercised by the bayoc in delegating power to the
other priests of the idols is not less ridiculous than all his
other affairs. The new anitero or priest-to-be collects much wine,
and the bayoc attends for one or two days a great drunken revel
which must last for the space of seven days without cessation. In
that revel everyone who enters or goes out, has leave to drink, and
they are so long-winded in that matter that as many as gather there
have to get drunk, and until he falls down and becomes dead drunk,
they do not allow him to leave that place. Then the bayoc thereupon
proclaims such and such a miserable wretch as master of such and such
an anito. As soon as the seven continuous days of the first revel are
finished, they begin another seven days counting every second day;
and when those second seven days are ended, they begin another seven,
counting every third day. If any of these circumstances are lacking,
the bayoc says that the idol or anito will punish them, and such anito
will not obey the priest. The pay which is given to the bayoc for
his assistance and proclamation to the new priest of his priesthood
is according to the anito which he takes; for the anitos have their
hierarchies among themselves. There is one anito which costs eight
taes of gold, some that cost six, some four, and some three, according
to the anito which each one wishes.

Acasi. The anito superior to all seems to me to be the one called
Acasi; for they sing him a song which says "Mag yaman man a Malyari
monagon si Acasi," namely, "Although Malyari is powerful Acasi
gets the first fruits." This is the refrain when they sing in the
sacrifice which is made to this idol. That idol has few priests, for
the authority given them by the bayoc to be able to offer sacrifice
to him costs them a great sum. That idol, they say, is useful for the
sick, and for works of importance. All his priests declare that they
talk with Acasi, but no one says that he sees him or does anyone of the
bystanders hear him talk. The same is true of the other idols and their
priests; and all become good and drunk whenever a sacrifice is made,
and the priest tells them that the idol has told him the lies that
he makes up, and the others believe them as truth. This is universal
among all the other sacrifices which are made to the other idols.

Manglobar. There is another idol called Manglobar. They say that
that idol pacifies angry hearts. Hence, when anyone commits a murder,
he sends to the priest of that idol to have him pacify the relatives
of the murdered man, and to reconcile them with the murderer. That
reconciliation consists in the murderer giving gold or something worth
it to the relatives of the murdered person, according to the rank
of the latter. If the murderer has no gold, then he gives a slave,
who is generally some Negrillo of the mountain, whom they capture
for that purpose. And if he cannot do that the priest kills a son
of the murderer or a very near relative. If the murderer cannot
do any of the above things, they kill him. The party offended also
generally has recourse to such priest in order that the offender may
be reconciled with the offended, and that is very general when the
offender is more powerful than the party offended or has more kindred
to protect him. Only a priest is able to uncover that idol.

Mangalagar. There is another idol called Mangalagar. Of that idol it is
said that he accompanies the priest wherever he goes on all occasions
when they invoke him (good guardian angel!) when they have to make any
garro or mangao, which means to cut off some head. If they have made a
catch, they give thanks to such idol, and make him a sacrifice. This
is so closely followed that they will under no circumstances mount
into their house without first offering some sacrifice to such idol;
for they say that they will be punished by that Mangalagar, if they do
not make him a feast before entering their houses, and they will have
no luck another time in cutting off any other head. All those feasts
are made with wine and drunken reveling. That idol has many priests,
but not so many as do the anitos whom they have for their paddy fields.

Of the anitos which they have for their rice, I have not been able
to discover more than five, as follows:

Aniton Tauo. He seems to me to be lord of the winds, and superior
to his four associates whom I shall immediately name. They offer the
pinicpig, which are the firstfruits of their rice to that one. They
gather the green rice and pound it, and afterwards parch it in a jar
or kettle and offer it to him, first making their bit of an altar
where they hang some handfuls of rice in proportion to the devotion
of each one. They call that method of offering mamiarag. Then follows
Dumagan, who they say causes the rice to head well; then Calasacas, who
makes it ripen; then Calasocos, who they say dries it. Accordingly,
they sacrifice to him so that he may not dry it up. Then follows
Damolag, who they say keeps it from the hurricanes when it is in
flower. Those anitos or idols have very many priests and priestesses,
although, as I have said, no one sees the said idols or talks with
them. They do not even paint them or have their images; but what the
priest or priestess says to them they consider as an oracle and say
that it will not fail. Every class of people have recourse to those
sacrifices; although some Indians do not believe in it at all, yet,
notwithstanding, all attend them, Christians and heathens, without
excepting anyone.



Of the superstitions of the Indians

I believe that the errors which they possess in this matter of
superstitions are not less than those which I have mentioned of
their idolatry, although I have not investigated it as thoroughly
as the matter of their idolatry. But with the lapse of time, they
will be discovered and ascertained. There is a bird which they call
salacsac. Its beak is red, as are also its feet. Some of its feathers
are green and some blue with black and white spots. That bird gets
its food in the river. If it appears on the right hand of any one
journeying to any place, he returns, for he says that some accident
will happen to him, or some great trouble on the road, or in the place
where he is going, such as being killed, or being shot with arrows,
or something similar. If the said bird appears on his left hand he
says that the same thing will happen to those whom he leaves at home,
such as his children, wife, father, mother, or very near relative,
and on that account he also returns. However, if the bird sings like
a man who is laughing, then he goes on, and says that that bird is
favorable to him. But if the said bird sings or croaks in any other
way he returns, for he says that it announces some very great danger
to him. There is another bird smaller than a gurrion which they call
pasimanuquen. They say the same of this as of the salacsac. They
say the same of the tocó, so called by the Tagálog, and chacon by
the Spaniard. If they go to the mountain or near it and any tree
falls, they say the same as of the chacon and of the two birds above
mentioned. If they go on a journey and hear anyone sneeze they also
return, and if they are prepared and about to do anything, they leave
it then if anyone sneezes. If they hear any crow cawing at night,
they say that it announces the death of a very near relative. If
any dog which belongs to them breaks any of its teeth or falls down,
they either kill the dog or give it to some one; for they say that
it announces some death to them. If the dog jumps out of the window
when it wants to leave the house, they also say that it announces the
same thing. If they dream that the clothing that they have is ragged,
they throw it away because they say that they will die. If they dream
that the house falls down on them and burns them, they destroy it,
for they also say they will die. The devil also has attempted to
discredit the holy rosary among them, and when they go hunting they
take it off, for they say that the dogs will bite the deer or wild
boar if they wear a rosary. Not one of these Indians eats if he is
alone, because they say that they will die. Consequently, what they
do is generally to make their food ready and carry it until they find
a company before whom they may eat. They have also dedicated some
places of the mountain and bamboos to the anito, and, consequently,
they cut nothing there, for they say that they will die and that the
anito will kill them, although they do not know to what anito it is
dedicated, or who dedicated the said mountain or district to such
and such an anito, and know only an old observance which they have
received from their ancestors. In their marriages they also have
their superstitions. After any marriage has been performed, husband
and wife go to the mountain to seek the salacsac or the pasimanuquen,
and if the bird sings well they return very happy; but if it sings
badly they return very sad. If it sings well they carry along the
road a bombon or pitcher of water, and by means of the said water,
which is drunk by all the bystanders, the two newly-married people
will have children. For the bird to sing well, it must sing on their
right hand and in the manner of the said bird which laughs. To sing ill
means nothing else than to sing on the left hand, so that the bird is
somewhat hoarse and sad. In such case they say that said marriage will
have a bad ending, and that one of the two will die in a short time. If
they do not see the bird, they say that they will have no children.



Of the customs of these Indians

Although those Indians have their kind of rank, since some are chiefs,
and others not, and there are others who are descended from slaves,
yet notwithstanding that they have no obedience one for the other. The
poor man does not obey the rich, nor does the chief have any authority
over him who is not a chief. Those who are obeyed (although but little)
are the old men, when they assemble as if in council or meeting of the
old men. But, in private no one dares to order another one, neither
the chief him who is not a chief, nor the rich man the poor man; for
here every one is master of his own will, and each one thinks that he
is greater than his neighbor. Their method of governing is by fear,
and accordingly each one tries to make the others fear him more than
any other. In order to accomplish that each one endeavors to beat the
others in committing murders, so that the others may fear him. They
commit those murders by treachery. In order that the relatives of
the murdered man may not slay the murderer, the latter pays such and
such a sum of gold to the kindred of the murdered person, according
to the rank of the deceased. For if such deceased was a chief or had
many kin, his murder costs more and is redeemed by a greater sum. The
lowest price with which a murder is generally redeemed is five taes
of gold. If the murderer has no gold, he redeems the said murder
with silver at the rate of eight pesos per tae of gold, although
gold is valued at ten pesos per tae among those Indians; for it is
very low grade gold, and as I have heard said does not reach fourteen
carats. The little gold that they do possess is much adulterated with
silver, copper, and bronze. But if the said murderer has no gold or
silver with which to redeem the murder that he committed, he goes to
the mountain and deceives some black or steals him and drags him to
his ranchería, and delivers him to the relatives of the murdered man
so that they may slay the said black. There is [no] great difficulty
in this for in mountains there they have many acquaintances among the
blacks. Those blacks are not without their enemies in some rancherías
of the blacks themselves, where they go to make the seizure. And since
the blacks are very revengeful in taking vengeance on their enemies,
they aid the Zambals to capture them. The Zambal gives the black,
whose services he has used for that purpose, some arrows or machetes.

But it must also be noticed that they do not always kill the black
who is thus captured, for sometimes they let him live, and he is
made a perpetual slave. There are many such slaves today, and I even
believe that all the slaves whom they have are of this kind. If the
murderer gives a slave in this way, he redeems the murder that he
committed. Even if he cannot give gold or silver or a slave he kills
one of his sons or delivers him to the relatives of the murdered one
so that they may slay him. They never hesitate to kill that son thus
delivered up, for when he can bear arms he will rebel and return to
his father. If perchance the child of the murderer given for ransom of
the murder which he committed is a daughter, when the said daughter
is married she will go to the house of her father or relatives with
her husband. For among the Zambals the woman is greater than the man,
and the men sometimes obey the women. The latter are very haughty,
and when the husband does not obey his wife, marriages are unmade very
easily. If we reach such straits that the murderer has neither gold,
silver, nor anything of value and cannot get a slave in the mountain,
or a black, which is the same thing for that purpose, and has no son
or daughter, or very near relative, such as some small orphan child,
then in such case his kin themselves help him in ransoming himself,
for in any other event, the relatives of the murdered person would
infallibly kill him.

Accordingly, these Indians esteem it highly to have kinship, and,
although they be very remote relatives, they treat one another as
brothers because of the need which they have one of the other, so that
they may be aided one by the other in such cases. Notwithstanding
the said estimation which they have for their relatives, we
see an evil and perverse custom which they have which is worse
than the most blood-thirsty beasts, namely, that Zambals are not
accustomed to have more than two children, one a male and the other a
female. Consequently, if they already have one male child, they kill
all the sons at birth until a daughter is born. Then after they have
had said daughter scarcely is the woman pregnant when they already
arrange to kill the son or daughter, as soon as it emerges from the
womb of the mother. But if any one begs said son or daughter, even
while yet in the womb of its mother it is given to such person. But the
one who has asked for it must pay its mother all the time that the said
mother is occupied in suckling such boy or girl; and afterward it is
considered as the child of that person at whose account it was reared
and kept alive. However, I know many in this manner who have great
love for their true parents. Since we discovered said custom among
them, we had delivered from death three children, although to the
great sorrow of their parents because they had not killed them. But
as soon as we find out that any woman is pregnant, we warn her that
she must not kill the son or daughter that she brings forth, for we
will punish her very severely, and they, for fear of the punishment,
allow their children to live.

They also have their mourning for very near deceased relatives. That
consists in wearing a cloth on the head, which they are accustomed
to remove in no case until they have committed a murder. And as
long as they wear the said mourning which they call balata, [88]
they are not accustomed to sing, or dance, or play their musical
instruments; nor will they attend any feast among them. Those feasts
are always made with wine, and their musical instruments are played
at them. But when they have cut off some head, or committed some
murder, then they remove the balata, or mourning. For that purpose the
relatives assemble and a great drunken revel is made where much wine
is consumed and some days spent in this occupation. Accordingly, it
is necessary that among these Indians many murders must be committed,
for no mourning is removed until some murder has been committed,
and then the relatives of the one who has been recently murdered in
order to remove the previous mourning, also put on new mourning, and in
order to remove that it is necessary to commit another murder. Hence,
they mutually kill one another, and they are always wearing mourning,
except when the murder is committed far away among the blacks, or among
the Indians subject to his Majesty in the neighboring provinces. And
in order that they may not proceed ad infinitum in this manner, they
try to commit the murders which they do commit secretly, when it is
not in their district, so that the said murder may not be attributed
to them. But, having committed the said murder, then they tell it to
their neighbors, and they make merry, sing, and play their music, for
as long a time as they ceased to make merry during the time when they
wore the balata. Thus it is commonly said that three-fourths of those
who die among these Zambals die violent deaths, and one-fourth and even
not that much, die natural deaths. But whenever there is any death,
be it violent or natural, there is the balata which must be removed
by another death, either by killing another Zambal, a black of the
mountain, or an Indian of the provinces, near the said Zambals, or a
black of the mountain, or an Indian. I know a man who is said to have
committed sixty murders. I do not dare to assert as true that which is
told me of that Indian, but what I know is that those Indians do not
get angry or take it as an affront among themselves to be so cruel, but
on the contrary they highly praise and assert those customs, and are
vain of the murders which they commit. Thus, as among the Spaniards,
one speaks and talks with courtesy of "my associate so and so," "my
neighbor," "my comrade," etc., and it is a kind of discourtesy to say
"Juan Fernandez" "Pedro Sanchez," etc.; so also among these Indians
it is a discourtesy to be called by one's companions only men. It is
a high and good politeness to be called by the name which signifies
in their own language, "an accomplice in a murder" that title being
"Araoc;" and thus they say Araoc Juan, etc. And as they are little
given to flattery, they never give the name of Araoc to him who does
not really and truly possess it; for it is regarded among them as
making a jest at one to whom the said title is given, if it does not
belong to him, just as among us it is a jest to give the title of a
brave man to one who does not dare to draw his sword from his belt.

Their marriages are not made between relatives, but on the contrary
they try to marry those who are not related to them; and I believe that
the reason therefor is to acquire new kinship by means of marriage,
for we see that he who has the most kindred is the most powerful, is
the one held in highest esteem by all and commits more murders in which
consists their greatest estate, for he has more and greater opportunity
to go scotfree from those murders which he commits. Marriages are not
performed until the relatives of both parties are assembled, and order
the two contracting parties to eat together from one plate. All the
other preceding preparations and ceremonies belong to the contract of
the marriage and the betrothal. Said marriages, moreover, are [not]
made by virtue of the wish of the contracting parties, for they are
married from childhood when most of the contracting parties do not
even have the use of their reason. The reason that has been given to
me for this is so that they may be raised together from childhood, and
contract love one for the other. But we see that very many marriages
result badly, and after marriage the parties separate, although
in this regard the men are very patient, for among these Indians,
as among all those of this land, it is the custom for the man to
give the dowry to the woman. Among the Zambals, it is the custom not
only to give the dowry to the woman, but also another kind of dowry
to all the relatives of the said woman. They call the latter dowry
sambon. Among the Tagálogs it was also formerly the custom and was
called sohol. That second dowry among these Indians is generally larger
than the first, which is the one that is given to the woman. If husband
and wife quarrel, and she wishes to separate from her husband and marry
another man, and if the cause of the quarrel has been given by the man;
they are divorced and he loses the dowry which he gave to his wife,
as well as that which he gave to the relatives of said wife. But if
the cause of the said quarrel proceeded from the wife and she wishes
to be divorced, she must return all the dowry, and in such case her
relatives also return that which was given to them. And since it is
of some consequence to them whether the two married people live at
peace or at war, it is very common for all the woman's kin to take her
side, in order not to return what was given to each one. Consequently,
although there may never be justice, the woman always has the argument
on her side to do that which she wishes. And since there is no other
justice here than the yua, bows and arrows, the tanca, and caraza, the
greater kindred and those most interested always prevail; and since
these are the relatives of the woman to whom the dowry was given and
the husband is alone, and at the most is supported by his brothers,
always or generally the argument is on the side of the wife, and the
husband has to give up both dowries. Consequently, the poor Zambal,
in order not to be left without wife and dowry, endures whatever his
wife wishes. Besides, these Indians are not so barbarous that they do
not know when they are right in what they ask, and when they are not
right. Consequently, the wife will never say that she wishes to be
divorced unless it is when the husband was the evident cause of the
quarrel. However, sometimes they are accustomed to make friendship
between the husband and wife, on condition that the husband commit
a murder. In such an event he leaves the house and does not come
again into the presence of his wife until he commits said murder. The
murder having been committed, and said wife hearing of it, before the
husband reaches the house, his wife goes to receive him with a new
bajaque in her hands, in order to present it to her husband in sign
of congratulation for obeying her. But in such an event the wife and
her relatives have to make good the damage which follows from the said
murder, and the husband is free. The ceremony of the wife going out
to meet her husband with the present of the bajaque on said occasion
is of so great importance among these Indians that the husband will
be grieved if his wife fails in this ceremony or courtesy.

The married women have one good custom, and that is that they are
chaste and loyal to their husbands. Scarcely can a married woman be
found among the Zambals of whom it can be said casually that she has
had lascivious communication with another, although it is very common
for all the people to sleep together in one hut or thicket, and all,
both men and women, are intoxicated. But there will be no occasion
for a man to jest with a married woman, and more, in the presence of
others. But I also believe that that chastity or less incontinence
in this matter was not taught by the devil for the welfare and honor
of these Zambals, but to give them more opportunities to commit more
murders and to make them more turbulent, for the married men are very
jealous of their wives and in no case do they leave them. Wherever they
go, they go together, and do not lose sight of one another. When they
go on a journey, they take all their possessions and the wife carries
it all in a basket which she bears on her back by means of a cord
from the head. The man with his bow and arrow escorts her. They are
accustomed even to carry the hen and its chicks in the said basket or
under the arm, so that they carry all that they can of the possessions
which they have in their house except what is not portable, and those
they hide in the thicket. And if the husband absents himself because
of any occurrence, and cannot take his wife with him, and if, during
the said absence, the wife weakens in her chastity, and it comes to
be common property in the ranchería, for if she has been weak it is
very difficult to keep such news from her husband, for these Indians
cannot keep a secret: then in such an event the husband kills without
any remedy the one who has offended him by sinning with his wife. And
having killed such a person, he informs the relatives themselves of
said wife of the treachery which his wife has committed in order that
they may kill her; and if the said relatives neglect to kill such a
wife, then, in that case her own husband kills her and can kill also
any relative of the said wife without being obliged in that account to
pay anything. Notwithstanding this custom, that quarrel is generally
patched up with gold, but they must have much gold among them for that
means. I know a principal woman, one of the most influential of said
Zambals, whom one of these contentions cost more than thirty taes of
gold and two slaves whom she delivered up so that their heads might
be cut off. But it is to be noted that the offender of the wife, or
the adulterer [mancebo], gives said gold to the husband of said wife,
and the wife gives the gold to her own relatives, if they are her
cousins and brothers. That woman and chieftainess is called Monica
Corosan and was married in facie eclesia [i.e., with the rites of
the Church], and because she has been weak and little or not at all
faithful to her husband, it cost her the sum above mentioned, and she
was divorced and separated from her legitimate husband, by whom she
had a son, and was remarried to her adulterer. He already has three
daughters. But although the said quarrel was patched up by means of the
gold she has not dared to appear before her relatives for more than
twelve years. Consequently, the fact that said women are so chaste
proceeds from this rigor which they exercise in this matter. If they
value their husbands and relatives so greatly, it is because the latter
may take vengeance. I believe that the single women are also chaste,
although some are generally careless; but both the woman and the
accomplice pay with their lives if the fact is learned. If any woman
is pregnant, her relatives force her to tell who is the accomplice
of her pregnancy, and if the two do not marry, the relatives kill
them both without being obliged to give any compensation therefor.

Burials. In their burials, they are not wont to shroud the deceased
but to clothe him. If he is a chief they put two dresses on him,
according to their manner, and two robes. If the deceased has any
share in any inheritance of gold, before they bury said deceased,
the gold is divided before the corpse itself, and the part which
belonged to him is placed in the grave with the said corpse with
his store of certain articles of food. I have heard it said of the
natives of Buquil that if the deceased is a chief and has any slave,
they kill a slave and bury him with his master. I have had very little
to do with the natives of Buquil, and, consequently, I do not know
how much truth there is in this, and I do not affirm it. I have also
heard another thing said which would horrify the ears were I to tell
it; hence I do not dare to set it down on this paper. For, as I say,
I have had but little to do with the natives of Buquil, as they have
not allowed us to enter there, and if I were to qualify it as true
when I was not sure that it was true, if it afterwards appears to
be false, it will be inferred that there is but little truth in this
paper of mine. Consequently, I will not mention it.

There is a kind of contempt which is very great among the Indians
for one who has not murdered anyone. Consequently, those who have
some little gold with which to pay for their murders are much given
to this vice of murdering. They generally buy slaves or negrillos of
the mountain so that their little sons might kill them. Binding the
wretched slave or black they take said sufferer into the presence
of their sons from three to seven years old and there kill him, and
by that means their minds and all their being become acquainted with
the idea of blood, so that when they are grown they may have so evil
a custom. It is a curious thing that they generally buy many blacks
or slaves for that purpose, and if one cannot do it, or has no wealth
for the purpose of buying a black or slave in order that he may kill
him alone, he unites with others, and thus many together buy said
black. One buys the right to give the first lance-thrust or stab,
another the second, another to take away a quarter of the head,
another another bit of it, another half the head--according to the
amount of the capital of each one--and he who wounds him with greater
ferocity, that one has the best lot. I will relate a matter in regard
to this, which happened to me when I was vicar of Abucay. Once I had
about five little Zambal lads in the convent whom I was teaching to
pray and read. It happened that the fathers of three of them came
to see them, and that gave the children, who were seven or eight
years old, a desire to return to Playa Honda with their fathers. I
gave them permission, for their parents begged it of me. I did not
give permission to the other two, and, consequently, they remained in
said convent with me. While the other little fellows were returning in
company with their fathers and passing by Mariyumo, which is a visita
of Mariueles, it happened that the Indians of that visita, who are
also Zambals and but very little different from those of Playa Honda,
had that day caught a black of the mountain, whom they were about to
kill on the following day. The Zambals and the children, their sons,
stayed for the feast in celebration of the killing of the black. For
their joy in being present at a death of any person in such a manner
is as great as it is for Spaniards to attend a zarza or play or all
to play at ring. [89] That news came to the ears of the children,
who remained under my care in Abucay, two months afterwards. They
were told of the feast which their three companions had had in the
village of Mariyumo when they were at the killing; and so great was
their sorrow that they had not returned on that past occasion with
their three companions that they began to bewail their lack of luck
because they had not returned with their companions so that they also
might have been present at the killing. Hence, one can infer their so
great inclination for this vice, for those who have never seen nor
known any better customs learn to kill from early childhood. And in
case that anyone has entire information concerning the peace and quiet
into which the Christians come by means of the Catholic faith, since
they have to live among Indians of such customs, they must always
have death in their hands or before their eyes, for one can trust
no one, since they do not trust themselves. For every step that they
take is at the risk of their lives. Often they kill from necessity,
as they believe, so that they may not be killed, as happens when
they see in their rancherías any person or persons whom they do not
know. Since they do not know whether such persons are about to kill
them, they anticipate them and take away their lives, but it is more
usual to kill for revenge and to make oneself feared and famous in
this matter. There are many of them who, when they have committed
fifteen murders, place on the hams of the legs certain strings of
a small white fruit of an herb which they call bantacan. When they
have killed seventeen persons, they place the said fruit very close
together in the manner of a rosary which they call tigdin. When the
number has reached more than nineteen, they take away said fruit and
in its place wear certain very highly colored sigueyes. But it is to
be noted that, although twenty men take part in one murder, in order
that they may wear that regalia, which they consider as tabi, [90]
each one claims said murder as his, as if he had done it alone. They
also generally tie a long narrow strip of anahao, or palmleaf,
on the hilt of their dagger or yua. That token shows that he who
carries it was the first one to strike the person that was killed
on that occasion. Notwithstanding the abovesaid, if anyone goes to
their rancherías in company with another Zambal of their number,
he is sufficiently safe although he might be still safer at Manila.



Of the change which we see today in these Indians

He who considers their barbarous customs, idolatries, superstitions,
and the natural and great inclination for killing which these Indians
possess, and in which they have been reared; and hears of the so
great change and the difference which exists at present in all
their customs, when compared to those that they possessed in their
recesses and rancherías: will easily understand that already God is
walking among them, and that He has already taken pity on the souls
and wishes them for Himself. The immortality of the soul has already
been explained to these Indians in their mother tongue; as has also
the reward which God has for those who keep His commandments and those
of our holy mother Church, and the punishment reserved for those who
break them, and that, for as many sins as man commits he has to take
his punishment in this life or in the next; and the unity of God,
His eternity, and at the same time that which the Christian man must
believe in order to be saved.

It has been father Fray Domingo Escalera who has already learned
their language, and has gone communicating it from one to the other,
until there are now very few who do not understand this. When said
father explains to them something of which they have not heard,
all look at one another, as if surprised to hear what they are
hearing. I have not had the capacity to do as much as the said
father, but I have managed to explain it also in the Tagálog tongue
to those who understand it. But they do not understand many things,
and I cannot tell them to them. Consequently, I trust, God helping,
that said father will produce great fruit among these Indians, as
he has learned their language. These Indians did not observe any
festivals or Sunday, or Lent, or vigil, or Friday. Consequently,
although there are many Christians baptized from childhood, it was
the same as if they were heathen, and there was no difference between
heathens and Christians. Having explained to them on one occasion the
seriousness of the sin of breaking feast days, one of them went to
the mountain and one Sunday while cutting some bamboos he hurt his
foot. The rumor spread among the Indians that God had punished that
Indian because he worked on Sunday, and from that time they have
observed feast days and Sundays. On another occasion, namely, Ash
Wednesday, the said father told them that they ought to abstain from
eating meat throughout Lent, and that God would punish whoever broke
said precept. Next day an Indian went hunting, and having killed a
carabao calf, while he was cutting it up and carrying it to his house
or to the village, the mother of the calf came out of the thicket
and killed the Indian. Thereupon, the father took occasion to again
charge them to abstain from meat during Lent, Friday, and vigil. All
through Lent there was scarcely one Christian or heathen who dared to
eat meat. For about eight months we lived in a small house which had
scarcely room for the two beds of two religious. We had three Indians
of Abucay who built us another larger house where we could live with
some freedom. There was no Indian who would be so kind as to aid them
in their customs in anything, until they saw that the presidio of
the Spaniards which is located twelve leguas from the village where
we united these Indians, had already about forty men, and as soon
as they heard the arquebuses in Buquil, which was ten leguas from
the said village, they moved quickly, and no longer answered a dry
"no quiero" [i.e., "I will not"], for whatever we commanded them, as
they had before answered us all the time. I have already said above
that the devil had discredited the rosary of the most holy Virgin,
our Lady, among these Indians, and although some had rosaries which
some faithful ones or religious had given them, in order to incline
them to that holy devotion, yet no one of them could recite it, for
there was no one who knew anything of the prayer. They only kept it
in order to show it to those who went to trade and traffic at their
rancherías, in order that they might consider them as Christians,
as it is a kind of affront among them not to be a Christian. On the
contrary they believed that nothing good would happen to them if they
wore the rosary about their necks. But seeing the esteem which we
had for those sacred beads, and that in their sicknesses when they
asked us for any remedy for their attacks in which we do not apply
any other medicine except the sacred rosary, and when they recognize
that they recover miraculously from their illness by the use of the
rosary alone, they believe that the devil had deceived them, and
are growing very fond of this holy devotion, so that now very many
of the married men, the single youth, indeed, the old men, wear the
rosary about their necks, some recite it in their houses, and others
attend church morning and afternoon to recite the rosary with the lads,
and very many of them already know the whole prayer, and recite it at
night in their houses in a loud voice. They formerly obeyed no one,
but now they show great respect to their gobernadorcillos, to their
chief, and to the old men, so that, if they are seated anywhere and
their gobernadorcillo arrives, they all rise, and no one sits or
covers his head until his gobernadorcillo is seated. Father Domingo
Escalera has lived for a short time with the Indians of Nuebo Toledo,
since they were gathered together. Having come to the said village
during the last days of the past Lenten season, and seeing the so
great change that God had produced in them, he said: "At the rate
with which God is changing the hearts of these Indians, they will
be better Christians than those of Masinloc before ten years' time,
although said Indians of Masinloc have been Christians for more than
sixty years." When we reached their districts in the beginning, the
children and even the women fled from us, but today the women are very
affable and those who have anything to wear go to church and scarcely
can we keep the children away from us. When we go to the village, they
come down from their houses and accompany us, and we can scarcely walk,
because they seize us by our habits, and place their scapularies before
our eyes. Every morning and afternoon they go to the church to pray
and to hear mass. Before mass we recite the rosary, and after mass the
whole prayer. In the afternoon we leave the church in the manner of
a procession in two choirs, and the father sings the prayer and they
answer until the prayer is finished. And on entering the church again
candles are lighted to our Lady, and the holy rosary is also recited.



Method used in getting these Indians to persevere in said prayers

The Zambals are the most cowardly people in these islands, although
they have hitherto been considered by the neighboring provinces as a
people of great courage and warlike. Their cowardice could be proved
by many examples, but that does not concern the present matter. Their
whole strength consists in fleeing, and their courage in hiding. From
that cowardice it proceeds that all the murders that they commit
are by treachery. It never happens that if, fighting face to face,
the enemy escapes and is on his guard and watchful, they commit any
murder, because of their great timidity and cowardice. Accordingly,
in order that those whom we have assembled in the three villages above
mentioned, may persevere in their settlements, the most efficacious
fear and the one most suited to their nature is that the Spaniards of
the fort and presidio of Paynauen of whom they have a very great fear,
may come very often to the said villages and overrun the land, and
penetrate even into their old recesses where they formerly lived; and
if perchance they should find anything planted in the said recesses
that they would destroy it and cut it down without leaving them
anything. And so that they may see that the father protects them,
when the said Spaniards come to the village, the father opposes them
and takes the part of the Indians. [91] But it is always necessary
in this matter for the soldiers to conquer, and the father is always
very careful to always inform the Spaniards by whom and where anything
is planted which it may be necessary to destroy, and that the edicts
which his Lordship, the governor, sent them be carried out. These are
to the effect that no one should plant anything in the old rancherías
and that in the village each one should plant one thousand feet of
gabes, and five hundred of sugar-cane; that said soldiers are to
continue to make raids through the whole plain as I say, very often;
yet, whenever the soldiers come to the village, they are to ask the
gobernadorcillo and cabezas (for whom already they have some obedience)
for permission to go to look for those who have become fugitives,
and the father is to go along in order to assure such fugitive. As
said absence has proceeded a trifle from fear of the Spaniard, the
Indians of the village themselves are to go to seek those who should
have become fugitives, in order that they may not go in company with
the Spaniard to the mountain, for the fear which they have of the
said soldiers is inexplicable. They are to oblige said Indians to
make their gardens and fields in the village, where they have fine
lands, very fertile for fields and gardens. If any are found to be
neglectful in this, such persons are to be bound in order to keep
them and take them to the fort so that they may pound rice for the
soldiers. By those measures, there is no man who dares to return
to the mountain. After they have lost their fear of the Spaniards,
the latter are to try to excite trouble between the Indians and the
blacks of the mountain, [92] but at all events said Spaniards are
to make no trouble for the Indians whom they find in the villages,
but rather must treat them well.

In order that this may have effect, it is necessary for the governor
to send twenty or thirty horses to the said district, so that the
Spaniards may get over the country, for the roads are intolerable,
especially from the fort to Santa Rossa de Banguen. That is a distance
of six leguas of very troublesome sandy ground without a drop of fresh
water in the dry season. There is a distance of six leguas also from
Santa Rossa de Banguen to Nuevo Toledo, where one cannot find a tree
under which to rest. Accordingly, without the said horses, nothing
can be done, for all those who should go to the said places run great
risk from the sun, as happened when Adjutant Alvaro Martin Franco
went to the said villages to hold the elections, when almost all
the Spaniards who accompanied him fell sick. Said horses will be of
great use to the soldiers in hunting, for this country has abundance
of game. With the horses also they can overrun the land of Buquil,
and terrorize intractable persons. Since said Spaniards often go to
and fro between these villages and to Buquil, no Indian will go to
the mountain, since no harm is done to them in the village; and those
of the mountain considering their restlessness and that they are not
safe and that the Spaniards destroy their fields will descend to sow
and to live in the settlement. For today, if those of the mountain do
not descend, it is because they fear that the Spaniards will punish
them for not having descended before.

In order to suppress all their bad customs, after having preached
against them, proving them with natural arguments which are very
easy and clear, with some examples which cause them horror, the most
efficacious means which I find is for the father to investigate all
their customs, and to understand them thoroughly, so that he may know
them all; and then to make fun of the Indians because they do not know
that that is bad. If this is not sufficient, it is efficacious for
the father to make them afraid that he is going to retire because they
refuse to learn good customs, and abandon their abuses and atrocities,
so that in such an event the Spaniards may come upon them and kill
them all; and by means of the fear which they have the father can do
whatever he wishes with them.

I assert that I have investigated thoroughly whatever I have written
in this paper by the aid of some Christian Zambals who are very good
Catholics whom I have had under my care for four years, and whom I
have been teaching to read and have instructed in our holy Catholic
faith by means of the Tagálog books which have been written for that
purpose by the zealous ministers whom that Tagálog nation has had. One
of these Zambals is the son of a priest of the idols, who was reared
in a ranchería where sacrifices were often made to the idols. An uncle
of this lad whom I also have under my charge was formerly bayoc of
the Zambals, so that he knows all the ceremonies, superstitions, and
sacrifices, and is also thoroughly conversant with their customs, for
he lived among the said Zambals for about twenty years. Besides this,
for three years I have had with me another child about ten years old
who also knows the customs of these Indians, because he was born and
raised among them, for he is the son of Zambal parents. All of those
persons tell me what passes among the said Zambals. Besides this, I
have also managed to prove it from the children of the village who,
since they do not realize my purpose in questioning them in regard
to these things, tell me it all. But if I ask any of the old men, or
anyone who is very maliciously minded, he will not tell me anything
unless I ask him secretly.

Consequently, I consider as true whatever I have written here, and
I have refused to write anything of which I am doubtful.


Fray Domingo Perez


[Below is added by another person:]

Until the year 1682, said Zambals were reduced and softened by the
vigilance and attendance of the father missionaries of the order of
our father St. Dominic. May our Lord prosper everything as He is able.

Afterward in November, of the year 83, a bold Indian with another who
accompanied him, waited in a concealed thicket for the father-vicar,
Fray Domingo Perez, who was journeying from one village to another,
and shot him with an arrow, so that he reached his village badly
wounded and died in a short time, after confessing to father Fray
Juan Rois. Since that time the Zambals have been in revolt. May it
be the Lord's will that they grow quiet. Now since the assembly of
84 the fathers have been living cautiously and near the fortress. The
vicar is father Fray Gregorio [93] and his associate Fray Juan Navas,
[94] errant. In Masinloc the vicar is Fray Juan Fernandez [95] and
his associate Fray Juan, [96] errant.

[Copy endorsed: "The undersigned, provincial archivist of the province
of Santísimo Rosario de Filipinas and conventual of the convent of
Santo Domingo of this city, certifies that the preceding copy is
faithfully copied from the original, which is preserved in the third
archives of martyrs--cajon 8, legajo 1, no. 2. In order that the above
may be apparent he signs the present in this convent of Santo Domingo,
January 3, 1906. The archivist,


Fray Julián Malumbres (rubric), O.P."]


[Endorsed: "A copy.

Manuel de Yriarte, chief, division of archives, ex-officio notary
public."]








NOTES


[1] The translation of the title-page of this book is as follows:
"Manifesto and historical summary of the foundation of the venerable
brotherhood of the Santa Misericordia of the city of Manila, the
hospital, house, and girls' school and church of Santa Ysabel; with
the accommodations and advantages for the common public welfare,
particularly of these islands; the alms, succors, and dowries for the
holy religious orders, and hospitals, orphan girls, widows, those
in prison, and other needy persons. Satisfaction of the charitable
and indefatigable task, disinterested and noble method of procedure,
faithful management without interruption or any diminution in the
works of charity, and the administration of the pious foundations
under their charge. Favors and protection which it merited and obtained
from our Catholic Monarchs. Recommendation, concessions, indulgences,
and relics with which the supreme pontiffs have honored and enriched
it. All compiled and extracted from the books, bulls, decrees, and
other authentic instruments which are kept in their archives, by
commission and order of the purveyor and deputies who comprise the
present board, by Captain Don Juan Baptista de Uriarte, regidor of
this most noble city, and its procurator-general, and former treasurer
and present secretary of said venerable brotherhood. Printed in the
college and university of Santo Thomas, with the necessary licenses,
by Juan Correa. The year 1728." The narrative is preceded by an
introduction; a statement by the author to the purveyor and deputies
of the financial board of the Santa Misericordia, to the effect
that he has completed his task of compilation, dated June 28, 1728;
thanks of the purveyor and deputies to the author, and expression of
intention to print the work, dated June 30, 1728; decree to be sent
to Fray Juan de Arrechedera, O.P., commissary of the Holy Office,
dated June 30, 1728; approbation of latter, July 8, 1728; government
license, July 9, 1728; table of chapters; note to reader.

Torrubia gives the following figures for the work accomplished by the
Misericordia from its foundation (in 1594) up to 1730. "This house has
endowed twenty-three thousand orphan girls, the daughters of Spaniards;
it has spent in their maintenance five hundred and eight thousand, nine
hundred and sixteen pesos. It has supplied to our Catholic monarch in
pressing emergencies four hundred and forty-nine thousand, four hundred
and eighteen pesos. It has expended in Divine worship one hundred and
fifty-five thousand, seven hundred and eighty-four pesos; and it has
given in alms four million, one hundred and thirteen thousand, two
hundred and seven pesos. This statement of expenditures is accurate,
and is drawn from the original books of the said house. In the life of
the venerable Fray Simon de Roxas, book 8, fol. 418, it is mentioned
as unprecedented that the Misericordia of Lisboa in one year gave
in alms thirty thousand ducados; but that of Manila gives every year
seventy-one thousand, eight hundred and twenty-four pesos."

[2] See other letters from Corcuera to the Misericordia, dated in
1637 and 1639 respectively, in our VOL. XXIX, pp. 172-174.

[3] The Order of the Holy Trinity was founded primarily by St. John
of Matha, a native of Provence who was ordained to the priesthood. On
the occasion of his first mass, he determined to devote himself to the
redemption of Christian captives from the Mahometans. Retiring for a
season of prayer to the cell of the aged French hermit, St. Felix of
Valois, the latter approved the plan, and in 1197, they both went to
Rome where they obtained the approbation of Pope Innocent III for the
erection of a new order. The pope ordered the bishop of Paris and the
abbot of St. Victor to draw up the rules for the order, which received
papal sanction in 1198. A white habit with a red and blue cross on
the breast was assigned as a distinctive dress. It received a new
confirmation and additional privileges by a papal bull of 1209. The
French monarch Philippe Auguste authorized the existence of the
order in his kingdoms, and Gauthier III, lord of Châtillon, granted
them land for a convent. Later as the order increased, the latter,
seconded by the king, granted them Cerfroid, near Grandlieu, on the
borders of Valois, which became the chief house of the order. The
two saints founded many houses in France. Many Christian slaves were
ransomed in Morocco and Spain. It was a fundamental rule of the order
that at least one-third of its revenues should be set aside for the
redemption of captives. It was estimated in the seventeenth century
that since its foundation the order had ransomed 30,720 Christian
captives. At one time there were as many as two hundred and fifty
houses. See Baring Gould's Lives of the Saints, ii, pp. 226-230;
and Addis and Arnold's Catholic Dictionary, p. 810.

[4] The limits of our space prevent us from presenting part i of
this interesting document in full; but such matter is selected as
relates to Manila, Cavite, Cebú, and Zamboanga, as being the most
important Spanish settlements in the islands. The list at the end
shows the contents of Valdés Tamón's report in full, and presents an
enumeration of all the military posts, with the names bestowed on the
forts therein. Part ii, on the ecclesiastical estate, is translated
in full (save for preliminary and final remarks, and two letters of
minor interest).

[5] The city of Manila is located in 14° 35' 31'' N. latitude,
and 120° 58' 08'' E. longitude (from Greenwich). The following
longitudes (reckoned from Greenwich) will enable the reader to
compute the differences in maps on which longitude is reckoned from
other meridians:

Madrid (Observatory), Spain, 3° 41' 21'' W.; San Fernando
(Observatory), Spain, 6° 12' 24'' W.; Paris (Observatory), France, 2°
20' 14'' E.; Ferro, the extreme southwest of the Canary Islands (the
assumed dividing line between the east and west hemispheres), 17° 20'
W.; Washington, D. C. (Observatory), 77° 2' 48'' W. (U. S. Philippine
Gazetteer, p. 183.)

[6] See accompanying plan of Manila, obtained from the Valdés Tamón
MS. in Madrid. An interesting "historical sketch of the walls of
Manila" is found in the Annual Report of the U. S. War Department,
1903, iii, pp. 434-446, which contains numerous illustrations of
the walls and gates, some of which show defenses which have since
been demolished. A note (by Capt. A. C. Macomb) states that the
map of Manila referred to in Valdés Tamón's report is supposed to
be identical with that carried to England by General Draper after
the capture of Manila in 1762, which is now in the British Museum in
London. Concerning the plates of the map taken to England by Draper
(the famous Murillo Velarde map, engraved in 1734), see our VOL. XLIX,
note 25.

[7] Possibly guns for firing chain-shots (also called "angel-shots").

[8] Pandayes: a term adapted from the Tagal, panday being the
equivalent of the Spanish oficial.

[9] Thus in MS., but evidently a clerical error, since the amount
of pay is so inadequate for the number of men. The amounts of pay
given in these lists, added together, make a total which is over 7,000
pesos short of the total in the next paragraph; it is probable, then,
that the pay of these artisans should be at least 7,000 more than
the amount stated in the text.

[10] Perhaps meaning men who had the care of keeping the barracks in
order and repair. The word is not found in the dictionaries.

[11] A word evidently coined from the native word galagala (see
VOL. XII, p. 34, note), and probably referring to the occupation
of gathering the resin which bears that name. It may be added to
the note above cited that this resin (also known as "almáciga" and
"dammar") is obtained in the mountains of southern Luzón and Panay,
the best coming from Camarines. (Official Handbook of Philippines,
p. 296); galagala, then, may be a Bícol word.

[12] Cebú is in 10° 18' N. latitude, and 123° 53' 05'' E. longitude
(U. S. Gazetteer of Philippine Islands, p. 454).

[13] In the Ventura del Arco MSS. (Ayer library), iv, pp. 335-408, is
the transcript of an interesting document--"Information furnished by
Don José Antonio Niño de Villavicencio in regard to the situation of
the town of Zamboanga; its original subordination to the royal crown;
its fortification, dismantling, and reestablishment; the condition
in which it was in 1737; its expenses; and the amounts which it
paid toward these." After a sketch (illustrated by various official
documents) of the early history of Zamboanga as a military post,
he relates its dismantling, and its reestablishment by Bustamante;
this latter is begun on April 5, 1719, under the command of General
Gregorio Padilla y Escalante, and its fort is named "Nuestra Señora
del Pilar de Zaragoza." Villavicencio carefully describes the fort,
and presents an itemized statement of the expenses of maintaining
it--which amount to 20,000 pesos annually, besides a reserve fund
of 5,000 pesos which may be drawn upon for extraordinary and urgent
expenses. The salary of the governor and military commander is 396
pesos a year. Two Jesuit chaplains are kept there, who receive each
100 pesos annually. There are eighteen other officers (commissioned
and non-commissioned), and two hundred privates; also five other
officials, including a surgeon. Besides this force of Spaniards is
a company of Pampango soldiers--a hundred men and five officers; and
a considerable number of men are also employed as rowers, builders,
coast-guards, and seamen. Rations amounting to 9,855 cavans of
rice are allowed in the budget of expenses; and the sum of 5,000
pesos is allowed yearly for ammunition and military supplies for
this post. The rice and other provisions are mainly furnished from
the provinces of Iloilo and Panay, on account of their fertility and
their nearness to Zamboanga. A considerable part of the expenses of
that post is obtained from the contribution made by the inhabitants of
the subjugated provinces, each tributario giving annually a ganta of
clean rice; this amounts to 109,503 gantas of clean rice--equivalent,
at the rate of twenty gantas cleaned to 48 gantas of palay, to 10,950
cavans of the latter--which is estimated to be worth, at the prices
paid by the royal officials, 5,356 pesos. Enumeration is made of
the numbers of tributes paid in various provinces, as follows: Tondo,
5,606 1/2; Bulacan, 4,963 1/2; Pampanga, 8,067; Pangasinan, 10,896 1/2;
Ilocos, 8,665 3/4; Cagayan, 5,218 1/2; Laguna de Bay, 6,795; Tayabas,
1,612 1/2; Camarines, 7,512; Albay, 3,481; Panay, 6,170 1/2; Yloilo,
10,406 1/2; Island of Negros, 503 1/2; Leite, 8,154 1/4; Cebu, 4,411
1/2. All these are tributaries of the crown; to these are added the
contributions made by "the tributaries and the encomenderos of the
encomiendas independent of the royal crown," which amount to 18,144
gantas. A deduction must be made from these of 1,105 3/4 gantas,
"from those who in the number of the said tributes do not make this
contribution, on account of being servants of the churches, and for
other reasons;" the result is the total above given. The tributaries of
the following provinces are exempted from the contribution: Balayan,
Mindoro, Caraga, Mariveles, Calamianes, and Cavite. A further source
of revenue for the expenses of Zamboanga is found in the monopoly
on the wine of the country; this had formerly belonged to the crown,
but had been surrendered at the petition of the city of Manila. Later,
the citizens being called upon to make donations for the support of
Zamboanga, the city petitioned that this be accomplished by renewing
the above crown monopoly of wine. "This new monopoly having begun to
be in force from the year 1731, the sum at which this contribution
[to Zamboanga] may be estimated must be figured according to the
successful bids [remates] at which the privilege has been leased;" it
was farmed out--that is, sold at auction to the highest bidder for a
term of three to five years. The first of these was Don Esteban Garcia
de los Rios, for 1731-33, for the sum of 10,000 pesos a year; the
second, Captain Pedro de Ceballos, for 1734-36, 15,500 pesos a year;
the third, Captain José Ruiz, for 1737-41, 25,000 pesos a year. The
proceeds of this monopoly, then, averaged during eleven years 16,833
pesos a year. This document is dated at Manila, February 4, 1738.

In regard to the contributions made by the Indians for the expenses
(outside of ecclesiastical) of the Philippine colonies, Torrubia says
(Dissertacion, pp. 98-103): "When the post of Samboangan was rebuilt
in the year 1755, it was the opinion of the very reverend Father Juan
de Bueras, provincial of the Society of Jesus, that the Indians of
Pintados, as those most interested in the maintenance of the fort,
should aid therein with a half-ganta of rice for each tribute. His
opinion was accepted, but with the enlargement of the contribution to
two gantas (which make one ganta of cleaned rice), and its extension
to all the islands, which amount is paid up to this day. I have
understood that this contribution amounts annually, on the average,
to two thousand five hundred pesos. During the fifty and more years
when Samboangan did not exist, it was paid just as when the fort was
there, notwithstanding that the cabildo opposed it; and the Indians
paid, without the motive for this imposition still remaining, at the
least estimate, more than one hundred and fifty thousand pesos. The
Indians are obliged to make other contributions. For the maintenance of
the soldiers, they furnish rice to his Majesty at two reals a caban,
and usually it is worth more; this is called the compra, and forty or
forty-five thousand cabans (or fanegas) of rice are levied from them in
compra, allotting it pro rata according to what each Indian sows. For
these cabans (or fanegas) no more than two reals are paid, although
that amount is worth four reals, or more; and it is to be noted that
in the suburbs of Manila the price ordinarily does not go below three
reals. The same practice is current in the compras of wheat, although
it is true that in this the Indians seldom lose much. Besides this,
the Indians do the timber-cutting for the ships, and do not receive
more than sixteen reals a month, which they do not have even for
their tools (which they carry with them); they are soldiers, they
row in the galleys, and they are mariners, artillerists, calkers,
and carpenters. And we know very well that in these occupations
they serve in the Ribera of Cavite without pay, and likewise in
the armadas, three, four, or five years, only to obtain a situation
in the ship which goes to Nueva España or Acapulco. Here [i.e., in
Madrid], without considering these contributions, all the expenses
[of the islands] are summed up for the account of his Majesty." He
goes on to say that from the sum of expenses must also be deducted
the voluntary contributions of the citizens; also that these military
expenses have been unfairly laid at the door of the Zamboanga fort. The
soldiers there and in the forts at Cebú and Iloilo are paid from the
situado contributed by the natives themselves; and the fleets which
are sent against the Moros, and the coastguard galleys at Zamboanga,
are not an expense caused by the fort there; "even if they were,
it is a necessary one, under penalty of the Moros eating us alive."

Torrubia ends his Dissertacion, which is a plea for the maintenance of
the fort at Zamboanga, with a scheme for the formation of a fund--to be
formed by levying a small tax on each of the Christian Sangleys, and
on every "tramp," whether Indian or mestizo--which shall be regarded
as an obra pia, and be placed in the management of the Misericordia;
its proceeds are to be used for the support of the military posts
and fleets which are maintained against the Moros, for the support
of missionaries in the Moro provinces, and even for the extension
of the gospel still further. This would relieve the natives from
the oppressive "Zamboanga donation," the citizens from the frequent
contributions now expected from them by the government, and the royal
treasury from the heavy burden of supporting the present list of
armadas and forts; and the Moro pirates would be easily held in check,
and the interests of both the Spaniards and the Indians protected.

[14] Zamboanga is in 6° 53' N. latitude, and 123° 5' E. longitude
(U. S. Philippine Gazetteer, p. 928).

Zamboanga was selected as the site for the fort in Moroland, "because
it was the indispensable landing-place for the hostile people;
because it deprived the Mindanaos of that port, which was the most
important one in their dominion, in which they built their ships,
and where they took refuge from an enemy; because it was the most
suitable place for our infantry; and because it was the frontier of
all the islands of Moroland, where those enemies landed, recruited
their forces, and repaired their vessels. It also was the point
of vantage for intimidating those kings, and depriving Mindanao of
half its power; and for facing (at three leguas distance) Basilan,
the people of which are so valiant, and subject to Joló, so that that
king also is thus disarmed of half his forces. To this was added the
consideration that the post had Christian Indians as neighbors, who,
free from the extortions of the Moros, would aid in the conquest
[of those lands] and the extension of our power and of our faith,
as has been actually done." (Torrubia, pp. 45, 46.)

[15] Fábrica (Latin, Italian, and Spanish; French, fabrique):
a technical term in church administrative usage. The ordinary and
common meaning is the material building or edifice, which (technically)
includes repairs, improvements, changes, etc., as well as the necessary
expense for caretakers of it, as watchmen, beadles, sweepers, etc.;
these people are paid from the funds of the fábrica--which might
be rendered as "building-fund," except that in ecclesiastical usage
fábrica usually presupposes that the building it already reared, while
the English phrase "building-fund" includes the idea of constructing
it. (Yet in Latin, Italian, and Spanish the term fábrica is also used
to include money for the erection of the church edifice, in cases where
it has not yet been built; where it has been completed and paid for,
fábrica is restricted to the meaning first given above, the "keep"
of the building.)

Thus usually the term has a material sense only; but sometimes
(though not commonly) fábrica is taken, as in the present text, in a
spiritual sense, and implies the support or maintenance (honoraria)
of the churchmen, the ministers attached to the building, as well as
the maintenance of divine worship, as required by ritual. Fábrica then
refers to affairs of the soul or spirit, the spiritual upbuilding or
edifice of the faithful. By extension, the same term is sometimes used
to mean the board of churchwardens who administer the property. In the
Philippines the church property (save that belonging to the religious
corporations) was in the hands of the bishop as sole trustee and
administrator, a power which he might delegate to his provisor
or vicar. The distribution of the fund mentioned in the text is
unusual.--Rev. T. C. Middleton, O.S.A.

[16] To this should be added 4 tomins, omitted in the table for lack
of room; the same addition should therefore be made to the total of
the cash column.

[17] This name, also Pineda in the next item, and Manzano in the last
one, is abbreviated in the original; and the forms given above are
necessarily conjectural.

[18] In the MS. "Tondo" was written here, but afterward crossed out.

[19] To this sum should be added 4 granos, omitted from the amount
of cash stated for Mindoro, for lack of room.

[20] He was royal secretary in the Council of the Indias. In this
letter (dated September 20, 1735) he states that the king desires
information about the islands, and their fortresses and fortifications,
because the recent fire in the palace at Madrid had destroyed many
papers; he asks for plans of fortifications, and reports of troops,
munitions, and artillery, and that they be sent as speedily as
possible.

[21] Evidently, from the context, referring to Cagayán de Misamis,
in Mindanao.

[22] At the time a royal secretary; his letter is dated at Madrid,
August 30, 1739, and asks for the report on the ecclesiastical estate
in the islands which is herewith presented.

[23] The title-page of this book reads in English thus: "Religious
hospital work [conducted] by the sons of our pious father and
patriarch, the father of the poor, St. John of God, in his province
of San Raphael of the Philipinas Islands: a condensed epitome of
its foundation, progress, and present condition, in succinct and
instructive style. Dedicated to the very reverend father Fray Alonso
de Jesus y Ortega, general of the same holy hospital order, by the
reverend father Fray Antonio de Arze, vicar provincial and visitor,
and prior of the convent at Manila--in obedience to whom it was
written by Fray Juan Manuel Maldonado de Puga, a religious and priest;
preacher, master of novices, and chaplain rector in the same convent
of Manila. Year of 1742." The dedication to the general, by Antonio de
Arze, is dated at Manila, July 14, 1740. The book is approved by Fray
Pedro de Zaragoza, of the same order, at Ocaña, February 26, 1742;
and permission for its issue is given by the general of the order
at Granada, September 28 following. It is approved by Father Martin
Garcia, S.J., "synodal examiner of this archbishopric and that of
Sevilla, and of the bishoprics of Malaga and Barzelona," at Granada,
on September 20; and the license by the ordinary is dated at Granada,
on September 26. The approval of the book by the Inquisition is signed
by Fray Pablo de Ezija, a Capuchin, at Granada, June 12 of the same
year; and finally, the permission of the royal Council to print it is
dated at Madrid, on July 9. The colophon reads: "Printed at Granada,
by Joseph de la Puerta, printer and seller of books: year of 1742."

[24] The same as French entresol; apparently equivalent to the
English word "basement," and referring to the space left under
Filipino buildings.

[25] Spanish, azucar rosado; described by Dominguez as "sugar cooked
to the point of caramel, to which is added a little lemon juice, so
that the sugar remains [granulated] like sponge sugar, thus serving,
with water, for a refreshing drink."

[26] These signatures indicate that the opinion rendered by the Jesuits
dates back of 1717, since in that year Clain died; it is probably
earlier than 1708, since in that year Arias and Bobadilla went to the
Palaos Islands (Murillo Velarde, Hist. de Philipinas, fol. 377 verso).

[27] Palma brava: the common name of Livistonia rotundifolia, of
the order Palmæ; see Merrill's Dictionary of the Plant Names of the
Philippines (Manila, 1903).

[28] Of interest in this connection is Herrmann Sokeland's "Ancient
Desemers or Steelyards," in Annual Report of Smithsonian Institution,
1900, pp. 551-364. It is well illustrated with engravings of various
primitive weighing instruments which are preserved in the museums of
Berlin, Germany, some of which came from Thibet and India.

[29] Apparently meaning here, not the Castilian language in general,
but as spoken in the islands.

[30] The marco is a weight equivalent to the half of a libra, and is
used for weighing gold and silver. The marco of gold is divided into
fifty castellanos, and that of silver into eight onzas. (Barcia.)

[31] Albarejo (or alberjon): a provincial term (used in La
Mancha), applied, like the Catalan candeal, to a variety of white
wheat. (Barcia.)

[32] Spanish tumbaga (from Malay tambâga, copper): an alloy of copper
and zinc, or a species of brass, with an excess of zinc; also known as
"Dutch gold" and "pinchbeck."

[33] In the Spanish text, extension; but this is apparently a
misprint for some other word, for which, in accordance with the
obvious meaning, we substitute "suppression." At the beginning of
Maldonado's work is printed a list of errata therein, thirty-two in
number; this is followed by the naïve remark, "There are some others,
which the discreet reader can correct."

[34] Spanish, Pico de oro; the same as the Greek Chrysostom.

[35] The word caballería has many meanings, but probably only two
are here involved; these are found in the supplement to Domínguez's
Diccionario nacional (ed. of 1878). One is, "In the Indias it is
understood as the distribution of lands or seigniorial domains granted
to the settlers or conquistadors in a country." It is possible that
the text refers to some of those military allotments, which might have
descended unbroken to Maldonado's time; but it is much more probable
that he uses the word in the sense of a measure for land. Caballería,
in Andalusia, means also the area of sixty fanegas (or 3.8758 hectares)
of land.

[36] This sentence sounds somewhat contradictory to the following
one; but it is the literal rendering of the Spanish, se graduaron con
prelacion de los Legados à las deudas de Justicia. This is but one of
many uncertainties in the text of Maldonado's work which presumably
arise from the blunders of native amanuenses which he mentions at the
beginning of chapter xvii; the translation is as close as possible,
but in various places has been necessarily made more free than is
usual in this series, in order to render intelligible involved,
elliptical, or even apparently erroneous phraseology.

[37] In the text, Escudo--a rather surprising and foreign use of this
word instead of corona.

[38] In the text, Tierras Tubiganes: tubigan is the Tagal word for
Spanish aguanoso, meaning "wet," or "irrigated."

[39] In the text, simenteras tabalcanes; but the word tabalcan does not
appear in Tagal dictionaries, and is probably a misprint for tubigan,
as a result of some error by Maldonado's native copyists. Quiñon in
Spanish means "share" or "portion," usually of profit in an enterprise;
but here it is evidently the Hispanicized form of the Tagal qiñong,
which is defined by Noceda and Sanlucar as a land measure equivalent
to 100 brazas square of area.

[40] That is, the founder of the order, St. John of God.

[41] Montero y Vidal says (Hist. de Filipinas, i, p. 463, note) of
the obras pias: "In 1880 they possessed a capital of 2 1/2 millions
of pesos, belonging to the following religious bodies: Discalced
Augustinians, 127,938 pesos fuertes; idem at Cavite, 33,117;
Order of St. Francis, 500,840; Order of St. Dominic, 205,092; the
[archiepiscopal] see, 88,155; House of Misericordia, 811,154; the city,
37,272; the privileged confraternities, 97,617." See our VOL. XXVIII,
p. 298, note 138.

[42] An interesting account of this legacy is given by Uriarte in his
history of the Misericordia (q.v., ante). Lobo, a native of Viana, in
Portugal, died on September 8, 1709, at Agaña in the Marianas Islands,
"having executed a power of attorney for disposing of his estate,
in which he left the board of the holy Misericordia as his executor,
declaring his mother, Isabel Gonzales Lobo--a widow, and a resident
in the said town [i.e., Viana]--the heiress of his property, in case
she had survived him. If not, he named his soul as his heir, with the
declaration that although he had in the said town married Victoria de
Silva he had no children by her, nor had she brought him a dowry at
the time and when they contracted matrimony." The Misericordia made
inquiries in Spain to ascertain whether the mother were still alive,
and the wife brought in a claim for part of Lobo's property; it also
appeared that the deceased had left a sealed will with his uncle,
Francisco Martinez Casados, in Viana. Not until 1723 did the papers
arrive from Spain to settle the difficulties attending this will;
it seems to have been decided earlier that Victoria de Silva was
entitled to one-half of the property gained by Lobo during the period
of their marriage [bienes gananciales], but the Misericordia refused to
pay out any money until the said documents should arrive from Spain;
also that board administered a large sum of money belonging to Lobo,
which was lent to General Miguel Martinez at interest, and could
not be repaid for several years, especially as his estate was long
in probate and greatly decreased in value. "Accordingly, even if the
conveyance of the share belonging to the said Victoria de Silva could
have been made, there was no opportunity for it." Nothing further
is said about Victoria, but the inference is that she had by 1723
died, or dropped out of sight, or was unable to push her claims
further. At all events, the Misericordia, according to Uriarte,
sold the property and distributed the proceeds according to the
terms of Lobo's will--having first consulted the learned doctors
of the Manila universities as to their justification in doing so,
who fully sustained the board's course; it followed, then, that
their procedure was lawful and Christian, and that they were not to
blame for the delays which occasioned the final disposition of the
estate of Lobo. The opinion of the Jesuit university is reproduced in
full; it is dated November 2, 1727, and signed by the licentiate Don
Francisco Fernandez Thoribio (apparently an auditor who held the chair
of civil law in the university) and Father Pedro Murillo Velarde, and
is fortified by numerous citations from canons. They decide that, Lobo
in his last will "having left his soul as the heir of his property,
that means only the direction that all of it may and should be spent
in suffrages, alms, pious foundations, and other ways which can
result for the relief and welfare of his soul; and in saying that he
'gives to the honorable steward and deputies of the Board all his
own faculty, amply and sufficiently,' he means that he leaves to
the judgment of the said Board the disposal of his goods, in such
manner as shall, according to the circumstances, appear most to the
pleasure of God, and the welfare and relief of his soul. Accordingly,
in virtue of the said power and faculty the said honorable  steward
and deputies have authority to proceed to the execution of the will,
in the manner which we propose." They approve of the bequests made
by Lobo for three chaplaincies; for the aid of the seminary of Santa
Isabel and the support of orphan girls; and for masses for the souls
in purgatory. They recommend that the girls of Santa Isabel set aside
the masses and prayers of a certain day for the repose of Lobo's soul,
for which shall also be said a thousand masses; and that an offering
be yearly made from this estate for the aid of the home for wayward
girls, in which a day shall also be observed with prayers for Lobo's
soul. No mention of Victoria de Silva is made in this opinion.

[43] Alguazil: one of the many words of law and administration
derived by the Spaniards from the Arabs. The word was originally,
according to Dozy, al-vacil, which was from al-wazir, "vizier." Under
the Arabs it was used to denote an officer of high rank, equivalent to
dux. The governors of provinces under the Ommiade Khalifs sometimes
received the title by way of extra dignity. The Christians used the
word down to the fourteenth century as an equivalent to judge of
first instance. Descending lower, in time it came to designate an
officer of the court, the bailiff--in which sense only alguacil is
now used. (H. E. Watts, in note to his edition of Don Quixote [London,
1895], iv, p. 14.)

[44] Gozos: "verses in praise of the Virgin or of the saints, in which
certain words are repeated at the end of every couplet" (Velázquez).

[45] In 1686 the Dominicans in Filipinas were strictly forbidden
to drink chocolate. This ordinance was observed for several years,
until chocolate became so cheap and so generally used (even by
the poorest Indians and negroes) that it came to be regarded as a
necessity rather than a delicacy, and the prohibition was removed
from the friars. (Salazar, Hist. Sant. Rosario, p. 379.)

The culture of the cacao (Theobroma cacao), from the seeds of which
chocolate is prepared, was introduced from Nueva España into the
Philippines under the rule of Governor Diego de Salcedo. Murillo
Velarde accredits this to the Jesuit Juan Davila (Hist. de Philipinas,
fol. 395 v.): "He cared for both the temporal and spiritual good of
the Indians, endeavoring that they should possess some means of gain
which would cause them to remain permanently in the villages, in order
to remove the difficulties which ensued from their wandering hither
and yon--for, going about in this manner, they were not instructed in
the Christian doctrine or in Christian morals--besides other damages
which they cause. For this purpose he interceded with the governor,
Don Diego de Salcedo, to cause to be brought from Nueva España some
shoots of cacao, in order to plant them in Bisayas. The governor
accordingly obtained them, while the father was at Carigara, where
a plantation was begun with good results; and from that place it has
spread to other villages and islands of Pintados--with great benefit
to those Indians, and to the general advantage of all the islands;
for this beverage is more necessary here than in other regions. It
is especially so for the ministers [of religion], who go about in
continual voyages and navigations, very often without having the
comfort of having any other provision or nourishment." Father Davila
was born in Sevilla in 1615, entered the Jesuit order at the age
of fifteen; and was ordained in 1639. For a time he was minister in
the college for Irishmen in Sevilla. He came to the islands in 1643,
and labored in the Bisayan missions for many years; he died in Ylog,
Negros, June 20, 1706. For seven years before his death he suffered
from a malignant cancer in the face. Concepción says (Hist. de
Philipinas, ix, p. 150): "Chocolate is a great aid to feeble stomachs;
and cacao is now produced in such abundance that it serves as the
common beverage of every class of people, although it is true that
some islands produce it of better quality and richness than do others."

The introduction of the cacao which was made in 1670 (see VOL. XX,
p. 198) is reconciled with that by Davila thus, by Blanco (Flora,
ed. 1845, p. 420): "It is very probable that with the remittance of
cacao plants which came from America at his order, some others were
brought over by private persons; and thus, at the same time when
the cacao was spreading through Carigara (where Father Davila was
laboring) and through other regions, it would also be cultivated by
Tagals. In the year 1674, when Father Ignacio de Mercado was parish
priest of Lipa, he says that he distributed seeds of this tree to
many persons." The allusion here to Tagals refers to San Agustin's
statement that the plant of cacao brought over by Pedro Brabo in
1670 was stolen from him by an Indian of Lipa, named Juan del Aguila,
who hid and cultivated it; and thence it spread throughout the islands.

[46] There is some uncertainty in the Spanish text, which reads,
Cirujano dozientos; y quarenta el Sacristan Mayor. Apparently there
is some typographical error in the punctuation; but there is no means
of verifying the fact involved.

[47] The money in the communal fund of the Chinese in the Parián
was called Lapuat, and in 1718 amounted to more than 20,000 pesos
(Concepción, Hist. de Philipinas, ix, p. 234).

[48] War had been declared by England against Spain in October, 1739,
in consequence of injuries inflicted on British commerce in the West
Indies; but letters of marque and reprisal had been issued by the
English government in July preceding, under which Captain Edward
Vernon captured the city of Portobello (November 22, 1739), and the
castle at Cartagena. Captain George Anson also was placed in command
of a large fleet, to harass the Spaniards along the coast of Peru,
then to proceed northward, attack Panama, and capture the Spanish
treasure-fleet, in which proceedings Vernon was to coöperate with
him. Anson's fleet was broken up by storms and sickness, and the
two commanders failed to make connections; so Anson, after various
depredations on the western coast of South America, sailed to China,
where he repaired his ship. Then he set out to meet the Spanish
galleon from Acapulco, the "Covadonga;" and on June 30, 1743, Anson
captured this vessel after a hot fight, with over 1,500,000 pesos of
silver, mostly in coin. To avenge this loss, a squadron of four ships
(the one here mentioned in our text) was despatched by the Manila
government in pursuit of Anson; they went to China, but could not
find the Englishman, who had sailed for his own country.

[49] Pardao (or pardo): a coin used in Portuguese India, worth 3
tostoons 3 vintens (Michaelis). This is equivalent to 360 reis,
or to very nearly 35 cents in United States money.

[50] After Governor Torre's death (September 21, 1745), the government
of the islands ad interim was assumed by Fray Juan de Arrechedera,
bishop-elect of Nueva Segovia. His first care was to inspect the
defenses and supplies of Manila, in view of the dangers which menaced
the colony from the English; and he sent to Batavia for cannon, guns
and ammunition, his envoy being a Frenchman who was well accredited in
the foreign factories, named Antonio Piñon, who is probably the man
mentioned by Calderon. Piñon returned to Manila with those supplies,
to the value of 38,995 pesos. (Concepción, Hist. de Philipinas, xi,
pp. 305, 306.)

[51] It is clear that the name China (which the French and Italians
pronounce Cina) is not the original name of that kingdom, but is
one imposed upon it by the foreigners who went thither to trade
and barter; it was adopted by the Portuguese, and afterward by our
people of the Philippines. Father Julio Aleni, a Jesuit, in a book
written in the Chinese language says, in discussing this point:
"China, according to foreigners, signifies 'the country or kingdom
of silk;' and, since there is so great abundance of that commodity
therein, those who sailed thither to buy it would say, 'Let us go to
the country of silk,' or 'to China,' which means the same. The like
statement was made to me by Don Fray Gregorio Lopez, bishop of Basilea,
in whose charge is now the church of China, a religious of ours, and
a native of that empire. To this opinion also incline Trigautius and
Kircher." The most common and ordinary name which those people give
to their empire, not only in books but in conversation, is Chung Kue,
that is, "the kingdom in the middle." In former times they gave this
name to the province of Hò Nan, which lies almost in the middle and
heart of that empire; from that region it was afterward applied to that
entire country. Others say that the Chinese regarded their kingdom as
being in the middle of the world, through their ignorance of the many
kingdoms that the world contains. For that reason they also call it
Tien Hia, that is, "the world," or, "the largest or principal part
of the world." Another name they very commonly give to it, calling
it Hoa Kue, or Chung Hoa, which means "flowery kingdom," or "garden,
forest, and pleasant place of the middle of the world." In the time
of the emperor Xun this name was much used, and it is still used
in literature. It is a very suitable name for that empire, for in
truth it is throughout a beautiful garden and a peaceful and pleasant
forest. (Domingo F. Navarrete's Tratados historicos, pp. 1, 2.)

[52] See Raynal's account of "the settlements, wars, policy, and
commerce of the Dutch in the East Indies," in his Établissemens et
commerce des Européens, i, pp. 151-260. An interesting description of
Batavia, the capital of the Dutch possessions in the Orient, is given
in pp. 221-228; and an account of the organization, administration, and
policy of the Dutch East India Company, in pp. 158-161, 228-255. The
foundation and early history of the Dutch settlement at the Cape of
Good Hope are related in pp. 201-213.

[53] Apparently a member of the royal Council; he sent orders that
during the war with Great Britain no galleon should sail from Manila
for Acapulco, stating that the king thus decreed in order to prevent
those rich cargoes from falling into the hands of the English. The
merchants petitioned Governor Arrechedera to suspend this decree, at
least by permitting them to send to Acapulco the goods which had been
registered for that port three years before--which were already damaged
by this delay, and would be ruined by a longer one; he did so (with the
advice of his counselors), and the galleon "Rosario" and the patache
"Pilar" were sent with cargoes in June, 1746. To accomplish this,
in the exhausted condition of the colonial treasury, the merchants
were obliged to contribute 50,000 pesos for the outfitting of the
ships and other expenses; and the royal officials, with the consent of
the ecclesiastical cabildo, borrowed from the funds in the treasury
belonging to the cathedral 29,805 pesos. The ships were manned with
crews of 500 and 350 men respectively. They made the voyage safely,
and returned to Manila with the situado for that year and 30,000
pesos on the arrearages in those of previous years. The "Rosario"
was again despatched with a cargo, and with request for the situados
which had been held back in Mexico; as these amounted to six, the
islands were in great need, and the royal treasury almost empty; but
the vessel was ill-constructed, and was driven back to port by storms.

[54] Concepción says (Hist. de Philipinas, xi, p. 237) that this
was "a little vessel, which was in the service of the missions and
presidios in California;" the viceroy sent it because, having heard
nothing from Manila for a long time, he feared that Anson had caused
destruction there.

[55] Raynal devotes book iv of his Établissemens et commerce des
Europées (t. i, pp. 400-548) to the "voyages, settlements, wars,
and commerce of the French in the East Indies." The first voyage to
India undertaken by a French commercial company (1601) was commanded
by Pyrard de Laval, whose account of his adventures in the Maldive
Islands has already been cited in these volumes; but this enterprise
was unsuccessful. After various abortive attempts by Frenchmen to
engage in the Oriental trade, an East India Company was formed in
France (1664) by the great Colbert, with an exclusive charter and many
special privileges. The company made a settlement in Madagascar,
which was abandoned in 1670, and the French ships then went to
India, where they established a post at Surat, and afterward one at
Pondicherry. At first the trade prospered, especially at the latter
post; but after a time the affairs of the company were mismanaged,
its funds diminished so that ruinous expedients, only temporarily
successful, were resorted to; its markets at home were spoiled by the
sale of India goods, taken by French privateers from English and Dutch
prizes, at very low prices; for lack of money, the company could not
keep up its purchases in India; heavy duties were laid on all India
goods; the conduct of the home government toward the company was,
although vacillating, generally oppressive, and its administration
corrupt; and the company long struggled on the brink of ruin. At the
end of the fifty years' term of their charter, they secured (1714) an
extension for ten years more; and in the period of "frenzied finance"
engineered by John Law (1716-21) various other trading companies
were merged in this one, which later was substantially aided by the
French government. For a time the company acquired great power and
extensive territories in India; but war broke out between France
and England, and in 1761 Pondicherry was captured and destroyed by
the English. Afterward, from 1764 to 1769, the company conducted a
prosperous Oriental trade; but its affairs had long been mismanaged,
and the government had meddled with these unduly, while there had
been much corruption among both its directors and its officials. It
was found to be heavily indebted, and its finances fell into almost
hopeless confusion; and finally a royal decree dated August 15, 1769,
suspended the exclusive privileges granted to the Company of the
Indies, and gave all Frenchmen liberty to navigate and trade beyond
the Cape of Good Hope. The company thereupon undertook to liquidate
their affairs, and made over to the government (April 7, 1770) their
property, the latter assuming the debts and obligations of the company.

In the period 1725 to 1770, the East India Company of France sent out
761 trading ships, an average of 17 each year; the number in 1725 was
33, but it dwindled toward the close of that period until, in 1769, it
was but 3; the ships, during the 45 years, were manned by 87,223 men,
an average of 115 to each ship. The amount of merchandise carried to
the Indias varied from 7,800,000 livres' worth (in 1769) to 612,000
(in 1764), and for the entire period was 133,000,000. The vessels that
returned to France numbered 585; they carried thither goods which had
cost 344,000,000 livres in the East, and which were sold in France for
636,000,000: the years in which these sales produced most profit were:
1741, a gain of 12,327,000 livres; 1752, 13,719,000 livres; and 1755,
12,785,000 livres. During the first decade, the company paid on its
sales, as duties to the crown, the sum of 25,000 livres annually;
then until 1765, with a few exceptions, 3,000 livres a year; and during
1765-71, sums varying from 538,000 to 126,000 livres a year. The annual
dividends varied usually from eight and a quarter to three millions of
livres; steadily decreasing (in groups of years) to the latter figure;
in 1746 the dividend was 15,000,000, but in that year the company
borrowed the large sum of 25,000,000. In 1765 the dividend was but
766,000 livres. Its capital in 1725 was 100,000,000 livres due from
the crown, and 39,835 in its ships and other assets. In June, 1747,
the government  increased its obligations to the company to 180,000,000
livres, in compensation for depriving it of the monopoly of the sale
of tobacco, and engaged to pay it the interest on that sum forever at
the rate of five per cent. (See a tabulated statement of the affairs of
the French company, at the end of the atlas volume of Raynal's work.)

After the exclusive privileges of the company were suspended,
the India commerce was carried on by private persons, and steadily
flourished. Raynal presents another table, showing the net product of
this private commerce, as indicated by the sales at the French port
of l'Orient, during 1771-78 inclusive, of merchandise brought from
the Indies, China, and the islands of France and Bourbon; it shows
a regular and large increase, save in 1778. The amounts of these
sales vary from 10,336,000 livres in 1771 to 27,509,000 in 1777;
in the following year the amount was but 14,026,000. The total sales
for the eight years amounted to 149,273,000 livres, an annual average
of 18,659,000.

[56] "[Lower] California serves as a way-station for the vessels
which sail from the Philippines to Mexico; Cape St. Lucas, situated
at the southern extremity of the peninsula, is the place where they
halt. They find there a good port, fresh food, and signals which
warn them if any enemy has appeared in those places which are most
dangerous for them. It was in 1734 that the galleon landed there
for the first time; and the orders given to it, and its necessities,
have drawn it to that place ever since." (Raynal, Établissemens et
commerce des Européens, ii, p. 106.)

[57] The writer of this letter was one of the auditors of the royal
Audiencia at Manila (Concepción, Hist. de Philipinas, xi, p. 295).

[58] Evidently referring to Pedro Murillo Velarde, extracts from whose
Historia de Philipinas have already appeared in this series. The phrase
"the Orient" alludes to the route via India to Europe.

[59] Full accounts of this mission may be found in Ventura del Arco
MSS., iv, pp. 447-591, in letters from the Jesuits Pedro Estrada and
Juan Angles, dated June 25, 1748, and June 18, 1749, respectively--with
letter from Felipe V to the sultan of Joló, and the latter's reply.

[60] This was Fray Pedro de la Santisima Trinidad Martinez de Arizala;
he was a native of Madrid, and had been an auditor in the royal
Audiencia of Quito for seventeen years, and was an honorary member
of the Council of the Indias. But, "disillusioned with the world, and
weary of honors, his sensitive conscience found room in the estate of a
Franciscan religious, taking their habit, and professing their austere
life." He took possession of the archbishopric of Manila on August 27,
1747, at the age of fifty-two years. Difficulties arose between him
and Arrechedera; but he contented himself with laying these troubles
before the court at Madrid. He died on May 28, 1755. (Concepción,
Hist. de Philipinas, xii, pp. 38-40, and xiii, pp. 338, 339.)

[61] See the detailed account of this episode, and of events connected
with it, in Concepción's Hist. de Philipinas, xii, chaps, ii-v,
which may thus briefly be summarized:

In 1735 Maulana, sultan of Joló, abdicated in favor of his son Mahamad
Alimudin. This youth was "brought up in the school of his father,"
in matters of craft and policy; he had spent some time at Batavia,
where he became proficient in the Arabic and Malayan languages, and in
the Koran--"which he explained with so much erudition that the Joloans
gave him the title of chief pandita of that kingdom," and he attained
among the Moros "an authority almost supreme." He negotiated for peace
with the Spaniards, which was effected in 1737; he promised to restore
the Christian captives, but his datos resented this, and refused to
obey. In May, 1740, a Recollect priest, Fray Hypolito de San Agustin,
was captured by Moro pirates; but certain Joloans--especially their
pandita, one Yaloc--rescued him and took him to Joló, where he was
kindly received and cared for. The sultan demanded a ransom of 12,000
pesos for him; after many difficulties and negotiations, and some aid
from the Jesuits, the captive priest secured his liberty by binding
the Recollect province to pay the amount demanded for ransom. Soon
afterward, the sultan was persuaded by Commandant Zacharias and
the Jesuit Isasi at Zamboanga to commute his claim to 1,000 pesos,
which was gladly paid by the Recollects. The peace made with Alimudin
stopped the invasions by the Joloans, but the Tirones from the Bornean
coast continued their destructive raids. Remonstrances being made at
Madrid by the representatives of Philippine interests, the king wrote
the letters to the rulers of Joló and Tamontaca (the latter being
Ameril Mahomenin Campsa), which have been previously mentioned in this
series; they were received at Manila in July, 1746, and were sent to
their destination by the hands of the Jesuits Isasi and Arcada. These
envoys conducted various negotiations with the sultan, who demanded
(and received) from the Manila government aid of money, guns, and
iron--for Joló, to repay him for the expenses which he had incurred in
aiding the Spaniards against the Tirones; for Tamontaca (or Mindanao),
to aid in the war with Gula, the son of the rebel Malinog. Arrangements
were made for the opening of Jesuit missions in Joló and Tamontaca;
but they soon came to naught. In September, 1748, a rebellion in
Joló unseated Alimudin, and sent him a fugitive to Zamboanga; and,
Ameril and Gula having become reconciled, threatened treachery sent
the Jesuit Moreno back from Tamontaca to the same refuge. Alimudin
went to Manila, here he was received with much éclat by Governor
Arrechedera; he was there apparently converted to the Christian faith
by the governor's persuasions.

[62] "By the marriage with Elizabeth Farnese (ancestry normal),
Philip V had, as an heir, Charles III, of Spain, who was the best
of the more modern sovereigns of that country--in fact, the only
normal one since before the days of the Emperor Charles V, now seven
generations in the background. Not that Charles III inherited any of
the ancient genius, for that had gone, never to appear again. He was,
however, ([to cite] Hume), 'an enlightened, generous, and just king
and a noble and magnanimous man,' and (Rose's Biographical Dictionary)
'possessed abilities as a monarch, and virtues as a private citizen,
... was a popular sovereign and a great economist of time, scrupulously
methodical in all his operations.'" Thus writes Dr. F. A. Woods,
in his Heredity in Royalty (New York, 1906), pp. 155, 156--a book
which endeavors, on scientific lines, to ascertain the influence of
heredity as displayed in the royal families of Europe. The chapter
on the rulers of Spain is found at pp. 124-171. He says (p. 138):
"The origin of the well-known insanity in the Spanish and Austrian
houses, perpetuated over thirteen generations and involving more than
a score of individuals, is a very interesting question. It cannot
be traced with certainty prior to Isabella, the Queen of John II,
of Castile. This Isabella was out and out insane, according to the
English alienist, W. W. Ireland; and from her, onward, the insanity
passed along in one form or another by the very intermarriages which
their pride and political motives caused them to arrange, with the
intended idea of making permanent their world power, but with the
inevitable result of losing that same prestige by placing it in the
hands of the unfortunate children whose inheritance was necessarily
mental weakness as the result of such unwise wedlocks."

For account of Carlos III's reign, see Manuel Danvila y Collado's
Reinado de Carlos III (Madrid, 1894). An interesting description
of this monarch's character and mode of life may be found in the
Dublin Magazine for April, 1763, pp. 238, 239; it is written by
a clergyman named Clark, "chaplain to the Earl of Bristol, late
ambassador at the court of Madrid." He says, among other things:
"He is the greatest Nimrod of his time: he sacrifices everything to
this favorite pleasure; he was disgusted at his public entry, because
it hindered him of four days sport. He stayed three days at Toledo,
and killed six wild mountain-cats, which, as I was well informed by
those who had calculated the expence of that expedition, cost him
exactly 1000 l. a cat." "It has been imagined that he is a very weak
prince, and of little or no understanding: Ir is a great mistake;
he has some parts, but is mulish and obstinate to the last degree;
and, by being constantly flattered, he imagines that he has more
understanding than he really possesses. He is reserved beyond the
common reserve of princes, has no confidant, and communicates his
will only by his orders to put into execution. He can neither be
led nor driven; all must come from himself." "He allows no minister
to remonstrate or argue with him." "He arrested and banished the
inquisitor-general, and sent him prisoner to a convent. He engaged
in the present war with England, contrary to the sentiments of his
ministers, and in direct opposition to the voice of the whole nation."

[63] A copy of the naturalization papers of Nicolas Norton y Nicols
as a Spaniard exists in the Archivo general de Indias at Sevilla; its
pressmark is, "Est. 105, caj. 2, leg. 13, libro 12, fol. 226b-229b,"
and the document is dated at Aranjuez, August 3, 1758. Norton became
a Catholic, and was allowed to trade in the Philippines. The allusion
to "192 years" is somewhat incorrect,  if he refers to the first
discovery of the islands, which occurred in 1565; or else he may
have begun to write out this proposal to the king as early as 1757,
which would tally with the above numbers.

[64] In the text, Bisarjas, evidently a clerical error. This, and a
few similar discrepancies in the MS., strengthen the conjecture that
it is not written by Norton's own hand; it was probably dictated by
him to an amanuensis.

[65] See articles describing the cocoanut, its uses, culture, etc.,
in Census of the Philippine Islands, iv, pp. 53-76; its uses are thus
characterized (p. 72): "Briefly summed up, its timber can be employed
in every form of house construction; its foliage in making mats, sacks,
and thatches; its fruit in curry and sweet-meats; its oil for medicine,
cookery, and illumination; its various uses in the manufacture of
wines, spirits, sugar, and vinegar." See also various scientific
articles regarding the culture of the cocoanut palm, its enemies,
and the qualities of its oil, in the Philippine Journal of Science,
Manila, 1906 (published by the Philippine government).

[66] Spanish, cañas, which (as sometimes elsewhere) indicates that this
name was bestowed indifferently on the bamboo and the rattan; but the
latter is here meant, of course, as being named bichuca (for bejuco).

[67] Spanish, clauos; apparently meaning that the natives used in
their housebuilding wedges made from the wood of the cocoanut tree
as a substitute for iron nails.

[68] Probably alluding to a document which is preserved in the Archivo
de Indias at Sevilla, by Norton y Nicols, dated at Madrid, September
2, 1757; it will be mentioned in the bibliographical section of this
series (VOL. LIII).

[69] The context would imply that sugar is here referred to; but the
writer does not mention it again, and seems to have abandoned his
attempt to export it.

[70] Spanish, estas ayudas de, followed by a blank space, doubtless
intended to be filled by costas.

[71] Concepción mentions this stone (Hist. de Philipinas, xii,
p. 25), found on a site selected by the Dutch; they had marked "a
stone with the letter T, which, as it was interpreted, signified,
'annexed to Terrenate.' This same token they had placed in other
uninhabited islands in the vicinity. This marked stone was dug up by
the sultan of Mindanao, who sent it to the governor of Samboangan,
Don Pedro Zacharias. Two Dutch chalupas went to call the Mindanaos
to account for this act, intending to obtain satisfaction for it by
placing the marked stone in the locality of Silangan, on the mainland
of Mindanao; but Radiamura courageously drove back the Dutch who made
a landing--who, in retreating, swore to return with adequate forces
for that enterprise."

[72] There is some confusion or error in these figures, which read,
in the MS., "35 = 3.94 @ 2,82:600." Without them, the totals amount
to 80,187,524; subtracting this from the entire total, there remains
a balance of 3,424,000, apparently indicating the value of the
sugar--save that the total for benzoin is erroneously figured in the
MS.; it should be 144,804. The MS. is also uncertain on some of the
other totals.

[73] The writer (or more probably his amanuensis) has made an error in
transcribing these sums; "six millions" should read "sixty millions,"
and at the end of the paragraph the amount of chocolate should be
"one hundred and fifty" instead of "fifteen" millions. The remaining
figures are correct.

[74] "In 1618, according to the testimony of Dr. Marradón, of
Marchena, to one hundred cacao-beans must be added a pound and a half
of sugar, two onzas of cinnamon, fourteen grains of Mexican pepper,
a half-onza of cloves, and two reals' weight of anise and annotto; and
one might add almonds, nuts, and orange-flower water. Years afterward
Dr. Colmenero of Ledesma modified this formula, making the paste in
the proportion of one hundred cacao-beans, one-half libra of sugar,
two granos of pepper, anise, cloves, Alexandrian [i.e., white] roses,
logwood, cinnamon, almonds, nuts, and a sufficient quantity of annotto
to give it color."

Until the end of the eighteenth century chocolate was prepared mainly
by hand-labor. "In the seventeenth century, the preparation of the
chocolate was made by artisans, who received twelve reals and an
azumbre [i.e., about half a gallon] of wine for preparing each day the
portion of chocolate from sixteen libras of clear cacao. The chocolate,
thus prepared and sold under the name of 'health chocolate,' often
contained special ingredients, chosen on account of the fashion, or
of the taste of the consumers; and if in those times great praise was
given to the chocolate which contained aromatic essences--vanilla,
amber, and orange--certainly not less famous on that account was
the chocolate of Madrid with its doradilla [i.e., ceterach], that of
Ávila with its pimentón [i.e., a large variety of pepper], and that
of Pamplona with its pepper and ginger. Fray Manuel Ordoñez says,
referring to the paste which we are considering, that 'in the past
century it was sold only in the apothecary shops, like physicians'
prescriptions, for our cure;' and from this citation we may infer
not only that chocolate was regarded as a special medicine, but that
it was considered as a therapeutic agent, worthy of being kept by
the pharmacists of the seventeenth century. Later, in the eighteenth
century, the preparation of chocolate began to be made by the guild of
spice-dealers, its ingredients being reduced to the cacao, cinnamon or
vanilla, and sugar; and the custom became somewhat general of adding
to the paste some biscuit-dough, in order to make it thicker when it
was diluted with water. At the same time when the 'health chocolate'
was sold in the spice-shops, a medicinal chocolate was prepared
in the apothecary shops, in which the principal products of the
pharmacopeia entered as ingredients. As the preparation of chocolate
had become general in the convents, in attempting to compete with the
spice-dealers the friars did not think of making it of better quality;
but, in order to sell it more cheaply, they subtracted from cacao and
cinnamon what they added in ingredients that were not always harmless
for the parishioner's health. In order that the importance of this
adulteration may be estimated, it is sufficient to cite some of the
additions most used, as wheat flour, rice flour; ground lentils, peas,
beans, and maize; starch, potato starch, and dextrine; olive oil,
sweet almond oil, yolk of egg, tallow of veal and mutton; storax,
chestnut [flour], gum tragacanth; cinnabar, red oxide of mercury,
red lead, carbonate of lime, etc." The manufacture of chocolate has
been conducted almost entirely by machinery during the past century,
and has accordingly thrown out the majority of the artisans who made it
by hand. (José del Carmenal, cited in Gräfenberg's Spanisches Lesebuch,
Frankfurt, 1899, pp. 7-11.)

[75] At the end of the atlas volume in Raynal's Établissemens et
commerce des Européens is a tabular "Enumeration of the population of
Spain, prepared in 1768 by order of his Lordship Conde de Aranda,
president of the Council of Castilla." The population is given
separately for each of the eight archbishoprics (which contain
48 bishoprics, 2 of them "exempt"). The lay population was thus
classed: married persons, 1,724,567 men and 1,714,505 women; unmarried
(presumably including children), 2,809,069 boys and 2,911,858 girls;
total, 9,159,999. Add the number of the clergy (both regular and
secular), which was 147,805, and the entire population numbered
9,307,804. Two curious discrepancies may be noted: the number of
married men is greater than that of the married women by 10,062, and
the girls exceed the boys by 102,789 (this latter an excess of about
3 2/3 per cent). The only region in which the number of married men
is practically the same as that of married women is the archdiocese of
Valencia, and the only one where the same thing is true of the boys and
girls is the archdiocese of Zaragoza. The greatest discrepancy in the
numbers of both these classes is found in the archdiocese of Burgos,
where there were 197,064 married men, and only 185,997 married women;
and it had 330,428 girls and only 310,545 boys. Highly significant
is the enumeration of the privileged classes, of whom in the total
population there were 846,657, thus classified: those enjoying
royal privileges, 89,393; in the department of finances, 27,577;
in that of the Crusade, 4,248; in that of the Inquisition, 2,645;
in the nobility, 722,794. It is to be observed that three-fourths
of all the privileged class are found in the archdiocese of Burgos
and the two exempt bishoprics--in the former, 324,661; in the latter,
306,378. Not less interesting are the statistics of the ecclesiastical
estate. In the 16,427 cities and villages were 18,106 parishes,
which were served by 15,641 curas. There were 2,004 monasteries,
containing 55,453 religious; and 1,026 convents with 26,465 nuns. All
these religious orders employed also 8,552 persons as procurators
and treasurers, and with the orders were affiliated 26,294 laymen. In
the service of the churches were 25,248 laymen; and besides the curas
there were 50,246 chaplains and beneficed priests. The total of all
these items is 147,805, the number above given.

[76] A literal translation of the text; but there seems to be some
omission or confusion in the statement. Possibly the writer intended to
make it contingent on the success of his project for making cinnamon
plantations.

[77] In the text, aljoresesite; there is no such word in the lexicons,
and it probably is an error (perhaps of an amanuensis) for ajo aceite,
the name of a pungent preparation of garlic, oil, etc., which is used
in the southern countries of Europe as a condiment.

[78] Thus in original, but the context would indicate that "no"
was omitted here.

[79] Spanish, caldos: a term applied to the wine, oil, and brandy
that are transported by sea (Dominguez).

[80] The somewhat fragmentary nature of these statements indicates
the probability that they are but memoranda, and the whole MS. a
rough draft, which was to be presented to the king in revised and
improved form.

[81] Wm. Reed (Negritos of Zambales) says, (p. 27): "Everything in the
history of the Zambal people and their present comparative unimportance
goes to show that they were the most indolent and backward of the
Malayan peoples. While they have never given the governing powers
much trouble, yet they have not kept pace with the agricultural and
commercial progress of the other people, and their territory has been
so steadily encroached on from all sides by their more aggressive
neighbors that their separate identity is seriously threatened. The
rich valleys of Zambales have long attracted Ilokano immigrants, who
have founded several important towns. The Zambals themselves, owing
to lack of communication between their towns, have developed their
separate dialects.... [but] Zambal as a distinct dialect is gradually
disappearing." "The Zambals, however, lived in so close contact with
the Negritos that they impressed their language on them so thoroughly,
that no trace of the dialect of the latter people remains in Zambales"
(p. 28).

As pointed out in a recent communication from James A. LeRoy, the
Zambals were mountaineers, kin to the Igorot of today, and of Malay
origin. They probably formed a portion of a very early migratory
movement from the south who were pushed back into the hills. They must
not be confused with the Negritos, who are not Malayan. The Malayan
origin of the Zambals can be easily seen from Perez's description.

[82] Fray Vicente Salazar in his Historia, chapter xxx, pp. 134-138
("Description of the province of Zambales, and the genius, customs,
and ceremonies of its Indians") makes use of this document by Perez,
which he greatly condenses. Indeed, it forms his sole authority on
the Zambals. In the two following chapters ("Fruit of the preaching
of our religious in the changing of the customs of the Zambals;" and
"Of some miracles which our Lord worked in this mission and reduction
of the Zambals") also he uses considerable of the material of Perez.

[83] Carrizal: land which is full of reed-grass.

[84] Tapis is a Tagálog word, being the name of a garment worn by women
as a skirt. See Noceda and Sanlucar's Vocabulario de la lengua tagala.

[85] Iua: a Tagálog word for a weapon resembling a dagger. See
ut supra.

[86] Wm. A. Reed (Negritos of Zambales, p. 26), commenting on Salazar's
description of the Zambals, which is condensed from Perez, says:
"Of course it is impossible to tell how much of this is the product
of the writer's imagination, or at least of the imagination of those
earlier chroniclers from whom he got his information, but it can well
be believed that the natives had a religion of their own and that
the work of the missionaries was exceedingly difficult." In this
connection, it is interesting to note that Perez later vouches for
the entire truth of whatever he has written.

[87] The original reads: presidiendo las ceremonias Bis. The
transcriber of the document for the present editors has added the
following note: "The structure and meaning of this word is not well
understood." It is the Latin word Bis, meaning "in a twofold manner,"
indicating that the god Malyari presides over both the feast and the
honors to the deceased.

[88] Balata is also used by the Tagálogs to signify "abstinence
from something in memory of any person." See Noceda and Sanlucar's
Vocabulario.

[89] The Spanish for "to play at ring" is correr á la sortija. This is
an equestrian sport, which is played by taking an iron ring as large
as a Segovian ochavo (a small brass coin). This ring is fitted into
another piece of iron, from which it can be easily withdrawn. The
latter is hung from a cord or pole a few feet from the ground, and
the horsemen and others who take part in the game, taking the proper
distance, go toward the ring at a run. The one who bears off the ring
on his lance is declared the winner. See Dominguez's Diccionario.

[90] A word of respect in the Tagálog dialect.

[91] Even when I was a missionary to the heathens from 1882 to 1892,
I had occasion to observe the said policy, to inform the chief of
the fortress of the measures that he ought to take, and to make a
false show on the other side so that it might have no influence on
the fortress. (Note by Dominican transcriber.)

[92] The same thing was advised by father Fray Remigio Rodriguez del
Alamo to Don Narciso Claveria y Oscariz, in respect to the different
tribes of Ifugaos. (Note by Dominican transcriber.)

[93] This was Gregorio Giraldez, who reached the Philippines in
1679. He was a Galician by birth and professed in the Dominican  order
August 31, 1666. He was immediately sent to the province of Zambales,
being appointed in 1682 vicar of Alalang, and in 1684, of Paynaven. In
1686 he became superior of the Manila convent. He filled the offices
also of procurator-general, president of San Juan de Letran, and
vicar-provincial. His death occurred at Manila, May 28, 1702. See
Salazar's Historia, p. 130; and Reseña biográfica, ii, pp. 215, 216.

[94] Juan de la Nava went to the Philippines in 1684, and was assigned
immediately to Masinloc, in the province of Zambales, which post
he filled for four years. In 1690 he was appointed vicar-provincial
there, at the same time having in charge the house at Paynaven. His
death occurred August 24, 1691. See Salazar's Historia, pp. 583, 584,
and Reseña biográfica, ii, p. 252.

[95] Juan Fernandez was born in the province of Asturias, and professed
at Valladolid, September 8, 1674. Reaching the Philippines in 1679
at the age of twenty-six, he was sent to the province of Zambales,
being assigned in 1680 to Masinloc, where he remained until 1686. He
was also vicar of Santiago Apostol de Bolinao (1688-96) and of Santa
Catalina V. y M. de Agno; vicar-provincial (1692-94); at Bolinao again
(1696-98); superior of Manila convent (1698-1702); president of the
house of Santa Mónica de Marihumo, in Zambales, from 1702 until his
death in the first half of 1703. See Salazar's Historia, p. 130;
and Reseña biográfica, ii, pp. 223, 224.

[96] This was Juan Rois. See VOL. XLI, p. 250, note 76.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Philippine Islands, 1493-1898;
Volume XLVII, 1728-1759, by Various

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 54041 ***
